<h2>Chapter I</h2>

<p>On the morning of the 29th of January, 1896,
Eustace Peters was found murdered in his bed
at his house, Grenvile Combe, in the parish of
Long Wilton, of which I was then rector.</p>

<p>Much mystery attached to the circumstances
of his death. It was into my hands that chance
threw the clue to this mystery, and it is for me,
if for any one, to relate the facts.</p>

<p>To the main fact of all, the death of my own
friend on the eve, as I sometimes fancy, of a
fuller blossoming of his powers, my writing
cannot give the tragic import due to it, for
it touched my own life too nearly. I had
come—I speak of myself, for they tell me a
narrator must not thrust himself quite into the
background—I had come to Long Wilton,
three years before, from a college tutorship at
Oxford, to occupy the rectory till, as happened
not long after, the son of the patron became
qualified to hold it. Country-bred, fond of
country people and of country pastimes, I had
not imagined, when I came, either the
difficulties of a country parson’s task or the false
air of sordidness which those difficulties would
at first wear to me; still less was I prepared
for the loneliness which at first befell me in a
place where, though many of my neighbours
were wise men and good men, none ever
showed intellectual interests or talked with
any readiness of high things. The comradeship
of Peters, who settled there a few months
after me, did more than to put an end to my
loneliness; by shrewd, casual remarks, which
were always blunt and unexpected but never
seemed intrusive or even bore the semblance
of advice, he had, without dreaming of it—for
he cared very little about the things of the
Church—shown me the core of most of my
parish difficulties and therewith the way to deal
with them. So it was that with my growing
affection for the man there was mingled an
excessive feeling of mental dependence upon him.
So it was that upon that January morning
a great blank entered into my life. Matters
full of interest, in my pursuits of the weeks and
months that went before, are gone from my
memory like dreams. My whole sojourn at
Long Wilton, important as it was to me, is a
thing dimly remembered, like a page of some
other man’s biography. Even as I call to
mind that actual morning I cannot think of
the immediate horror, only of the blank that
succeeded and remains. I believe that no one,
upon whom any like loss has come suddenly,
will wonder if I take up my tale in a dry-eyed
fashion. I can use no other art in telling it
but that of letting the facts become known as
strictly as may be in the order in which they
became known to me.</p>

<p>Eustace Peters, then, was a retired official
of the Consular Service, and a man of varied
culture and experience—too much varied, I
may say. He had been at Oxford shortly
before my time. I gathered from the school
prizes on his library shelves that he went there
with considerable promise; but he left without
taking his degree or accomplishing anything
definite except rowing in his college Eight (a
distinction of which I knew not from his lips
but from his rather curious wardrobe). He
had learnt, I should say, unusually little from
Oxford, except its distinctive shyness, and had,
characteristically, begun the studies of his later
years in surroundings less conducive to study.
He left Oxford upon getting some appointment
in the East. Whether this first appointment
was in a business house or in the Consular
Service, where exactly it had been and what
were the later stages of his career, I cannot
tell, for he talked very little of himself.
Evidently, however, his Eastern life had been full
of interest for him, and he had found unusual
enjoyment in mingling with and observing the
strange types of European character which he
met among his fellow-exiles, if I may so call
them. He had ultimately left the Consular
Service through illness or some disappointment,
or both. About that time an aunt of his died
and left him the house, Grenvile Combe, at
Long Wilton, in which a good deal of his
boyhood had been spent. He came there, as
I have said, soon after my own arrival, and
stayed on, not, as it seemed to me, from any
settled plan. There he passed much of his
time in long country rambles (he had been, I
believe, a keen sportsman, and had now become
a keen naturalist), much of it in various studies,
chiefly philosophic or psychological. He was
writing a book on certain questions of
psychology, or, perhaps I should say, preparing to
write it, for the book did not seem to me to
progress. My wife and I were convinced that
he had a love story, but we gathered no hint
of what it may have been. He was forty-three
when he died.</p>

<p>This is, I think, all that I need now set down
as to the personality of the murdered man.
But I cannot forbear to add that, while his
interrupted career and his somewhat desultory
pursuits appeared inadequate to the reputation
which he had somehow gained for ability, he
certainly gave me the impression of preserving
an uncompromisingly high standard, a keenly if
fitfully penetrating mind and a latent capacity
for decisive action. As I write these words it
occurs to me that he would be living now if this
impression of mine had not been shared by a
much cleverer man than I.</p>

<p>On the 28th my wife was away from home,
and I had supper at Grenvile Combe, going
there about seven o’clock. There were three
other guests at supper, James Callaghan,
C.I.E., William Vane-Cartwright, and one
Melchior Thalberg. Callaghan was an old
school-fellow of Peters, and the two, though for
years they must have seen each other seldom,
appeared to have always kept up some sort of
friendship. I knew Callaghan well by this time,
for he had been staying three weeks at Grenvile
Combe, and he was easy to know, or rather
easy to get on with. I should say that I liked
the man, but that I am seldom sure whether I
like an Irishman, and that my wife, a far shrewder
judge than I, could not bear him. He was a
great, big-chested Irishman, of the fair-haired,
fresh-coloured type, with light blue eyes. A
weather-worn and battered countenance
(contrasting with the youthful erectness and agility
of his figure), close-cut whiskers and a heavy
greyish moustache, a great scar across one
cheek-bone and a massive jaw, gave him at
first a formidable appearance. The next
moment this might seem to be belied by something
mobile about his mouth and the softness of his
full voice; but still he bore the aspect of a man
prone to physical violence. He was plausible;
very friendly (was it, one asked, a peculiarly
loyal sort of friendliness or just the reverse); a
copious talker by fits and starts, with a great
wealth of picturesque observation—or invention.
Like most of my Irish acquaintance he kept one
in doubt whether he would take an exceptionally
high or an exceptionally low view of any matter;
unlike, as I think, most Irishmen, he was the
possessor of real imaginative power. He had
(as I gathered from his abundant anecdotes)
been at one time in the Army and later in the
Indian Civil Service. In that service he seemed
to have been concerned with the suppression of
crime, and to have been lately upon the
North-West Frontier. He was, as I then thought, at
home on leave, but, as I have since learned, he
had retired. Some notable exploit or escapade
of his had procured him the decoration which
he wore on every suitable and many unsuitable
occasions, but it had also convinced superior
authorities that he must on the first opportunity
be shelved.</p>

<p>Vane-Cartwright, with nothing so distinctive
in his appearance, was obviously a more
remarkable man. Something indescribable about him
would, I think, if I had heard nothing of him,
have made me pick him out as a man of much
quiet power. He was in the City, a merchant
(whatever that large term may mean) who
had formerly had something to do with the far
East, and now had considerable dealings with
Italy. He had acquired, I knew, quickly but
with no whisper of dishonour, very great wealth;
and he was about, as I gathered from some
remark of Peters, to marry a very charming
young lady, Miss Denison, who was then
absent on the Riviera. He had about a fortnight
before come down to the new hotel in our
village for golf, and had then accidentally met
Peters who was walking with me. I understood
that he had been a little junior to Peters at
Oxford, and had since been acquainted with
him somewhere in the East. Peters had asked
him to dinner at his house, where Callaghan
was already staying. I had heard Peters tell
him that if he came to those parts again he
must stay with him. I had not noted the
answer, but was not surprised afterwards to find
that Vane-Cartwright, who had returned to
London the day after I first met him, had since
come back rather suddenly, and this time to
stay with Peters. He now struck me as a
cultured man, very different from Peters in
all else but resembling him in the curious
range and variety of his knowledge, reserved
and as a rule silent but incisive when he did
speak.</p>

<p>Thalberg, though not the most interesting of
the company, contributed, as a matter of fact,
the most to my enjoyment on that occasion. I
tried hard some days later to recall my
impressions of that evening, of which every petty
incident should by rights have been engraven on my
memory, but the recollection, which, so to speak,
put all the rest out, was that of songs by
Schubert and Schumann which Thalberg sang. I
drew him out afterwards on the subject of music,
on which he had much to tell me, while
Vane-Cartwright and our host were, I think, talking
together, and Callaghan appeared to be dozing.
Thalberg was of course a German by family, but
he talked English as if he had been in
England from childhood. He belonged to that race
of fair, square-bearded and square-foreheaded
German business men, who look so much alike
to us, only he was smaller and looked more
insignificant than most of them, his eyes were
rather near together, and he did not wear the
spectacles of his nation. He told me that he
was staying at the hotel, for golf he seemed to
imply. He too was something in the City, and
I remember having for some reason puzzled
myself as to how Vane-Cartwright regarded
him.</p>

<p>I must at this point add some account of the
other persons who were in or about Peters’
house. There were two female servants in the
house; an elderly cook and housekeeper, Mrs.
Travers, who was sharp-visaged and
sharp-tongued, but who made Peters very comfortable,
and a housemaid, Edith Summers, a plain,
strong and rather lumpish country girl, who
was both younger and more intelligent than she
looked. It subsequently appeared that these
two were in the house the whole evening and
night, and, for all that can be known, asleep all
night in the servants’ quarters, which formed an
annex to the house connected with it by a short
covered way. In a cottage near the gate into
the lane lived a far more notable person, Reuben
Trethewy, the gardener and doer of odd jobs,
a short, sturdy, grizzled man, of severe
countenance, not over clean. Peters was much attached
to him for his multifarious knowledge and skill.
He had been a seaman at some time, had been,
it seemed, all sorts of things in all sorts of places,
and was emphatically a handy man. He was
as his name implies a Cornishman, and had
come quite recently to our neighbourhood, to
which in the course of a roving existence he
was attracted by the neighbourhood of his uncle,
Silas Trethewy, a farmer who lived some three
miles off. He was now a man of Methodistical
professions, and most days, to do him justice, of
Methodistical practice; but I, who was perhaps
prejudiced against him by his hostility to the
Church, believed him to be subject to bitter and
sullen moods, knew that he was given to
outbursts of drinking, and heard from his
neighbours that drink took him in a curious way,
affecting neither his gait, nor his head, nor his
voice, nor his wits, but giving him a touch of
fierceness which made men glad to keep out of
his way. With him lived his wife and
daughter. The wife was, I thought, a decent woman,
who kept her house straight and who came to
church; but I had then no decided impression
about her, though she had for some time taught
in my Sunday school, and had once or twice
favoured me with a long letter giving her views
about it. The daughter was a slight,
childish-looking girl, whom I knew well, because she
was about to become a pupil teacher, and who
was a most unlikely person to play a part in a
story of this kind.</p>

<p>Our party that evening broke up when, about
ten o’clock, I rose to go; and Thalberg, whose
best way to the hotel lay through the village,
accompanied me as far as the Rectory, which
was a quarter of a mile off and was the nearest
house in the village. We walked together
talking of German poetry and what not, and
I cannot forget the disagreeable sense which
came upon me in the course of our talk, that a
layer of stupidity or of hard materialism, or
both, underlay the upper crust of culture which
I had seemed to find in the man when we had
spoken of music. However, we parted good
friends at the Rectory gate, and I was just going
in when I recollected some question about the
character of a candidate for Confirmation, on
which I had meant to have spoken to Peters
that night. I returned to his house and found
him still in his library. The two guests who
were staying in the house had already gone to
bed. I got the information and advice which
I had wanted—it was about a wild but rather
attractive young fellow who had once looked
after a horse which Peters had kept, but who
was now a groom in the largest private stables
in the neighbourhood. As I was leaving, Peters
took up some books, saying that he was going to
read in bed. He stood with me for a moment
at the front door looking at the frosty starlight.
It was a clear but bitterly cold night. I well
remember telling him as we stood there that he
must expect to be disturbed by unusual noises
that night, as a great jollification was taking
place at the inn up the road, and my parishioners,
who realised the prelate’s aspiration for a free
rather than a sober England, would return past
his house in various stages of riotous
exhilaration. He said that he had more sympathy with
them than he ought to have, and that in any
case they should not disturb him. Very likely,
he added, he would soon be asleep past rousing.</p>

<p>And so, about a quarter to eleven, I parted
from him, little dreaming that no friendly eyes
would ever meet his again.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch02">

<h2>Chapter II</h2>

<p>I was up early on the 29th. Snow lay thick on
the ground but had ceased falling, and it was
freezing hard, when, while waiting for breakfast,
I walked out as far as my gate on the village
street to see what the weather was like.
Suddenly Peters’ housemaid came running down
to the village on her way, as it proved, to the
police-station. Before passing she paused, and
breathlessly told me the news. I walked quickly
to Peters’ house. Several neighbours were
already gathering about the gate of the drive
but did not enter. I rang the bell, was admitted
by the housekeeper and walked straight up to
Peters’ bedroom. Callaghan and
Vane-Cartwright were there already, the former
half-dressed, unshaved and haggard-looking, the
latter a neat figure in bedroom slippers and
a dressing-gown. We had only exchanged a
few words when the police-sergeant entered,
followed a minute or two later by a tall and
pleasant-faced young constable, who brought
with him the village doctor, an ambitious,
up-to-date youth who had lately come to those parts.</p>

<p>I have some little difficulty in saying what
I then observed; for indeed, though I looked
intently enough on the dead face and figure,
and noticed much about them that is not to my
present purpose, I took in for myself very little
that bore on that problem of detection which
has since interested me so much. I cannot now
distinguish the things which I really saw upon
hearing the others mention them from the things
which I imagine myself seeing because I knew
they were mentioned then or later. In fact I
saw chiefly with the eyes of the Sergeant, who
set about his inquiries with a quiet promptitude
that surprised me in one whom I knew only as
a burly, steady, slow-speaking, heavy member
of the force.</p>

<p>There was little to note about the barely
furnished room which showed no traces of
disorder. On the top of some drawers on the left
of the bed-head lay a curious, old-fashioned
gold watch with the watchkey by it, a
pocket-knife, a pencil, a ring of keys and a purse, the
last containing a good deal of money. On a
small table on the other side of the bed stood a
candlestick, the candle burnt to the socket; by
it lay two closed books. Under the table near
the bed lay, as if it had fallen from the dead
man’s hand or off his bed, a book with several
leaves crumpled and torn, as if, in his first alarm,
or as he died, Peters had caught them in a
spasmodic clutch. I looked to see what it was,
merely from the natural wish to know what had
occupied my friend’s mind in his last hour. It
was Borrow’s <i>Bible in Spain</i>. When I saw the
title an indistinct recollection came to me of
some very recent mention of the book by some
one, and with it came a faint sense that it was
important I should make this recollection clear.
But either I was too much stunned as yet to
follow out the thought, or I put it aside as a
foolish trick of my brain, and the recollection,
whatever it was, is gone. The position of the
body and the arrangement of the pillows gave
no sign of any struggle having taken place.
They looked as if when he was murdered he
had been sitting up in bed to read. He could
hardly have fallen asleep so, for his head would
have found but an uncomfortable rest on the
iron bedstead. But I repeat, I did not observe
this myself, and I cannot be sure that anybody
noted it accurately at the time.</p>

<p>The surgeon stepped quickly to the body,
slightly raised the left arm, drew aside the
already open jacket of the sleeping suit, and
silently indicated the cause of death. This was
a knife, a curious, long, narrow, sharp knife for
surgical use, which the murderer had left there,
driven home between two of his victim’s ribs.
I say “the murderer,” for the surgeon’s first
words were, “Not suicide”. I had no suspicion
of suicide, but thought that he pronounced this
judgment rather hastily, and that the Sergeant
was right when he asked him to examine the
posture of the body more closely. He did so,
still, as I thought, perfunctorily, and gave certain
reasons which did not impress either my
judgment or my memory. I was more convinced by
his remark that he had studied in Berlin and
was familiar with the appearances of suicide. I
may say at once that it appeared afterwards, at
the inquest, that there was reason to think that
Peters had not had such a knife, for he never
locked up drawers or cupboards, and his servants
knew all his few possessions well. It appeared,
too, that the owner of the knife had taken
precautions against being traced, by carefully
obliterating the maker’s name and other marks on
it with a file.</p>

<p>In the midst of our observations in the room
a vexatious interruption happened. I have
forgotten to say that the servants had been
sent out of the room by the police-sergeant, and
that, almost immediately after, the constable
who brought the doctor had been sent down to
examine the outside of the house. For some
reason he was slow in setting about this; it is
possible that he stopped to talk to the servants,
but in any case, he went out through the kitchen,
and explored first the back of the house, where
he thought he knew of an easy way of making
an entrance. Meanwhile the neighbours, who
had collected about the gate, had been drawn
by their curiosity into the garden, and by the
time the constable had got round to the front
of the house several were wandering about the
drive and the lawn which lay between it and the
road. They had no more harmful intention
than that of gazing and gaping at the windows,
but it led to the very serious consequence that
a number of tracks had now been made in the
snow which might very possibly frustrate a
search for the traces of the criminal. This the
Sergeant now noticed from the window.</p>

<p>As for the actual carriage-drive I was
fortunately able to remember (and it was the only
useful thing that I did observe for myself) that
when I had arrived there had been no
footmarks between the gate and the front door
except the unmistakable print of the goloshes
worn by the housemaid on her way to call the
police. But the tracks on the lawns and
elsewhere about the house might cause confusion.</p>

<p>Upon seeing what was happening the
Sergeant asked Vane-Cartwright, Callaghan and
myself to await him in Peters’ study, while he
went out to drive away the intruders, to make
the constable keep others out and to pursue
his own investigations. While we waited
Vane-Cartwright, who had spoken little but seemed
to watch all proceedings very attentively, made
the sensible suggestion that we should look for
Peters’ will, as we ought to know who were his
executors. We consulted the housekeeper, who
pointed out the drawer in which the few papers
of importance were kept, and there we soon
found a will in a sealed envelope. The first few
lines, which were all that we read, showed me
that, as I had expected, I was Peters’ executor
along with an old friend of his whom I had
never met but who, I believed, as was the fact,
now lived in America.</p>

<p>The Sergeant now rejoined us; he had
discovered nothing outside, and, though the tracks
of the intruders made it difficult to be certain,
he believed that there was nothing to discover;
he thought that the murderer had approached
the house before the snow began to fall, and he
found no sign that he had entered the house in
the manner of a housebreaker. He had, I must
say, taken a very short time about his search.
He wished now that the servants should be
summoned, as of course it was necessary to
make inquiries about the movements of all
persons connected with the house. But he was
here delayed by Callaghan who had matters of
importance to relate.</p>

<p>He and Vane-Cartwright had been disturbed
during the night in a notable manner. They
had actually had an alarm of murder, and
curiously enough a false and even ludicrous alarm.
About 11.30 o’clock they had been roused by
loud shouting outside the house, amid which
Callaghan declared that he had distinguished a
cry of murder. He had come tumbling out of
his room, calling Vane-Cartwright, who slept in
the next room, and who immediately joined him
in the passage. Without waiting to call Peters,
whose room was some distance from theirs and
from the staircase by which they descended
(for there were two staircases in the main part
of the house), they went to the front door and
opened it. The flash of a bull’s-eye lantern in
the road, the policeman’s voice quietly telling
some revellers to go home and the immediate
cessation of the noise, showed them that they had
been roused by nothing more serious than the
drunken uproar which I had predicted to Peters
would disturb him. The two men had returned
to their rooms after locking the front door again;
they had noticed that the library door was open
and the lights out in that room; they had noticed
also as they went upstairs (this time by the
other staircase) light shining through the chink
under Peters’ bedroom door; and they had
heard him knock out the ashes of a pipe against
the mantelpiece. The pipe now lay on the
mantelpiece; and, of course, that particular noise
is unmistakable. They concluded that, though
he was awake and probably reading, he had not
thought the noise outside worth noticing.
Callaghan added that he himself had lain awake
some time, and that for half an hour afterwards
there had been occasionally sounds of talking
or shouting in the lane, once even a renewal of
something like the first uproar.</p>

<p>The report subsequently received from the
constable who had been on duty along the road
that night confirmed the above, and a little
reflexion made it appear that the disturbance
outside had nothing to do with the murder.
In fact the only thing connected with this
incident which much impressed me at the time was
Callaghan’s manner in relating it. He had up
to now been very silent, he now began to talk
with furious eagerness. He readily saw and
indeed suggested that the disturbance which he
related was of little consequence. But having
to tell of it he did so with a vividness which
was characteristic of him, so that one saw
the scene as he described it, saw indeed more
than there was to see, for he spoke of the ground
already white and the snow falling in thick
flakes, when he was pulled up by the Sergeant
who said that the snow had not begun to fall till
three o’clock that morning. Callaghan began
angrily persisting, and the Sergeant appealed
to Vane-Cartwright, who up till now had said
little, merely confirming Callaghan’s narrative
at various points with a single syllable or with
a nod of his head, but who now said that
Callaghan was wrong about the snow. He added
the benevolent explanation that Callaghan, who
was really much excited, had combined the
impressions of their false alarm over night with
those of their all too real alarm in the morning.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch03">

<h2>Chapter III</h2>

<p>Hereupon Callaghan, who had a more
important matter to relate, changed the subject
abruptly by saying, “Sergeant, have your eye
on that man Trethewy”. He told us that, ten
days before, Trethewy had quarrelled with his
master. Peters, he said, had met Trethewy in
the drive, at a point which he indicated, and,
noticing a smell of spirits, had firmly but quietly
taken him to task, telling him that his occasional
drinking was becoming a serious matter.
Callaghan had come up at the moment and had
heard Trethewy, who was by his account
dangerous with drink at the time, answer with surly
insolence, making some malicious counter-insinuation
against his master’s own habits, exploding
for a moment into wild anger, in which he seemed
about to strike his master, but to refrain upon
catching sight of Callaghan’s powerful frame
beside him, then subsiding again into surliness
and finally withdrawing to his own cottage with
muttered curses and a savage threat. This was
the substance of Callaghan’s statement. But
there was a great deal in it besides substance;
the whole of the conversation, from the moment
at which Callaghan came up, was professedly
repeated word for word with a slight but
dramatic touch of mimicry, and the tone and temper
of master and man were vividly rendered. I
can never myself remember the words of any
conversation, and for that reason I am unable
now to set out Callaghan’s narrative, and was
unable at the time to put faith in its accuracy.
Here and there a phrase was presumably truly
given because it was given in Trethewy’s own
dialect, but once at least the unhappy Trethewy
was made responsible for a remark which he
surely never made, for it was pure Irish, and
indeed I think it was the very threat of
picturesque vengeance which I had myself heard
Callaghan address to a big boy in the street
who was on the point of thrashing a little boy.
One detail of the description was a manifest
mistake. Callaghan indicated (truly, I have
some reason to think) the spot in the drive
where such altercation as did happen took place,
but he added that Peters stood watching
Trethewy with his hand upon a young tree. Now
Peters had planted that tree with Trethewy
several days later, just before the frost set in;
and other details in the story seemed equally
incredible. “Ever since then,” concluded
Callaghan, “I have seen murder in that fellow’s
eye. Mind you, I have had to do with murderers
in India. Three times have I marked that look
in a man’s eye, and each time the event has
proved me right, though in one case it was long
after. I tell you this man Trethewy——” But
here Vane-Cartwright stopped him. He had
already disconcerted Callaghan a little by
pointing out the Hibernicisms that adorned the
alleged remarks of Trethewy; and now he quelled
him with the just, but, as I thought, unseasonably
expressed, sarcasm, that if he had seen murder
portended in Trethewy’s glance it would have
been a kind attention to have given his host
warning of the impending doom. He went on
to insist warmly on the totally different
impression he had himself gathered from Trethewy’s
demeanour to his master. He was not apt to
say more than was needed, but this time he ran
on, setting forth his own favourable view of
Trethewy, till he in turn was stopped by the
Sergeant who said, “Really, sir, I do not think
I ought to listen now to what any gentleman
thinks of a man’s manner of speaking, not if it is
nothing more than that”.</p>

<p>The Sergeant then sent for Trethewy. I
had wondered that we had not seen him before,
the explanation was that he had been away at
night, had returned home very late, and so had
come late to the house in the morning and
was still doing the pumping when the Sergeant
sent for him. However, he seemed at last to
have slept off the effect of whatever his
nocturnal potion had been, and he gave a clear
account of his movements without hesitation
and with a curiously impressive gravity. He
had suddenly made up his mind at dusk on the
previous evening to go to his uncle’s house,
where there was a gathering of friends and
kinsfolk, which he had at first intended to
avoid. They had made a night of it. He
had started home, as several, whom he named,
could testify, at four o’clock in the morning
(the church clock near his uncle’s was then
striking), and the violence of the snowstorm
was abating. He had come across the moor
by a track of which he knew the bearings well.
This track struck into the grass lane which
passed near the back of the house at the other
side of the pasture, and which curved round into
the road joining it close by Trethewy’s cottage.
As he came along the lane a man on horseback
leading a second horse had overtaken him and
exchanged greetings with him. He had seen
the man before, but could not tell his name or
dwelling or where he was going. The snow
had done falling when he reached his cottage.
Once home, he had turned in and slept sound
till he was roused soon after eight by his wife
with the news of the murder. He had seen
nothing, heard nothing, guessed nothing which
could throw light on the dreadful deed of the
night. Trethewy was dismissed with a
request from the Sergeant to keep in his house,
where he could instantly be found if
information was wanted from him. This he did.</p>

<p>The two servants were now summoned, and
the Sergeant had a number of questions to ask
them. The housekeeper in particular had a
good deal to say about her master’s ways,
the household arrangements and so forth, and
seemed to find satisfaction in saying it at
length. So a lot of trivial details came forth,
which I, who was by this time becoming
exhausted, had little patience to follow. Was the
candle which was found burnt out a new candle
the evening before, or a candle-end, or what?
The question was asked of the housekeeper, but
the housemaid answered with promptitude that
it was a full new candle which she had herself
put there last evening, shortly before the master
went to bed. We learnt also that Peters was
very irregular about going to bed; sometimes
he would take a fit of sitting up, working or
reading, night after night, and sometimes he
would go to bed early, but always he had a
book with him and lay awake for a while
(often for hours and hours, as he had confessed
to her) reading it after he went to bed.
Sometimes it would be a story book, but more often
one of those dull books of his; and much more
on the same subject would have been
forthcoming if the housekeeper had not at last been
stopped, without, as I thought, having told us
anything of importance.</p>

<p>At last I went home, to find the churchwarden
irate at my lateness for an appointed
interview about the accounts of the dole
charities, and to have a forgotten but
much-needed breakfast pressed upon me. I would
rather have been alone, but Callaghan gave me
his company as far as my house, and expounded
his view about Trethewy all the way. He left
me at my door to go in search of Thalberg,
whom up to that moment we had all forgotten.</p>

<p>In about three-quarters of an hour Callaghan
burst in on me. Where he had breakfasted,
if at all, I neglected to ascertain, but he had
contrived to get shaved at the village barber’s,
and he now looked fresh and seemed keen.
He was this time in a state of great
indignation against Thalberg. He had been unable
to see him, but had ascertained that he was
still at the hotel, and that he had heard the
news of Peters’ murder, but had seemed little
interested in it, and had rejected the landlady’s
suggestion that he might like to go up to the
house to learn the last news of his unhappy
friend. It appeared that Thalberg had shut
himself up in his room ever since, but had
ordered a fly to drive him to the afternoon
train at the station five miles off. The landlady
and Callaghan seemed to have agreed that there
was something peculiarly heartless in his
omission to call at Peters’ or to make any inquiries.</p>

<p>Callaghan soon left me, returning, as I thought,
to Grenvile Combe, while I endeavoured to
settle myself to prepare my sermon for the next
day, Sunday, with a mind hardly indeed awake
as yet to the horror of the morning or to the
loss I had sustained, much less able in any
connected way to think over the meaning of
our observations, but mechanically asking over
and over again whether it was reasonable that
my now confirmed aversion from Thalberg was
somehow associated in my mind with the object
of our investigations.</p>

<p>I say “our” investigations; as a matter of
fact I had no intention whatever at that time
of busying myself with investigation at all. In
the first place I was quite aware that I had no
aptitude for such work, and in the second, and
far more important place, I, who hold it most
undesirable that a clergyman should be a
magistrate, could not but feel it still less fitting that
he should be a detective in his own parish.
But I could not escape altogether. About
2.45 I received a visit from the Sergeant, a
much-embarrassed man now, for he brought
with him the Superintendent, who had driven
over in hot haste to take charge of the inquiry.
The Sergeant had zealously endeavoured to rise
to the occasion, and to my unpractised judgment
seemed to have shown much sense. Perhaps
his zeal did not endear him the more to the
keen, and as I guessed, ambitious gentleman
who now took over the inquiry, but any way
he had been guilty of real negligence in
allowing the snow round the house to be trampled
over by trespassers, and at this the
Superintendent, who had rapidly gathered nearly all
that the Sergeant had to tell, seemed greatly
exasperated; moreover, the Superintendent had
noticed, if the reader has not, that the
public-house had been open very late the previous
night. His present errand was to ask me to
come to the house, not because I was the
deceased man’s legal personal representative,
but because he foresaw possible explorations
in which my topographical knowledge of my
large and scattered parish might be of use.</p>

<p>We returned to Grenvile Combe, and the
Superintendent went straight to the
death-chamber where he remained some minutes with
the Sergeant and me, taking note with much
minuteness and astonishing rapidity of all the
details which I have already mentioned.
Suddenly he opened the door and called up the
housemaid; she arrived at length, the housekeeper, who
fetched her, being refused admittance. “Why,”
said the Superintendent pointing to the window,
“is that window latch unfastened and the other
fastened?” The housemaid said shyly but quite
decidedly that she did not know, but this she
did know, that both had been fastened by her
last night, that one of the few matters in which
her master showed any fussiness was insisting
that a window should be latched whenever it
was shut, and that he never neglected this
himself. Why had the Sergeant not noticed this in
the morning? Poor Sergeant Speke, already
crestfallen, had no answer; at least he made
none. Our stay in the room was short. The
Superintendent, I believe, returned there that
evening and spent an hour or two in searching
microscopically for traces of the criminal; but
now he was in haste to search the garden. “I
shall begin,” he said, “at the point under that
window. It is past three already. Come on,
there is not a minute of daylight to be lost.” At
the point under the unlatched window he made
a startling discovery, startling in that it had not
been made before.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch04">

<h2>Chapter IV</h2>

<p>I am now driven to attempt the task, which I
had hoped to escape, of a topographical
description. To begin with what is of least importance
for the present. The village of Long Wilton
lies in the valley of a little stream, and two
roads run Northwards from the village along
the opposite sides of the valley. The road
along the Western side leads up a steep hill
to the church, built at some distance from the
village for the benefit of the former owners of
the manor house. Just beyond the church
lies a house which was the manor house, but
has now lost its identity in improvements and
extensions and become a new and not very
beautiful hotel. This hotel owes its origin
to the South-Western Counties Development
Company, Limited, which discovered in its
neighbourhood promising golf links, whose
promise may be fulfilled when the extension of
the railway is completed. I ought to but do
not thank the Company for a liberal
contribution made for the reseating of the church in
the days of my predecessor. The hotel spoils
the view from Grenvile Combe, across the
valley. Its upper windows command a
prospect of the whole of Peters’ grounds. This,
however, does not concern us yet.</p>

<p>The road on the other side of the valley
leads to some outlying hamlets which form
part of the parish. On the right hand of it, as
you go Northwards, the ground rises steeply
towards a wide tract of moorland. About a
quarter of a mile out of the village a grass lane
diverges from the road and leads in a
North-Westerly direction. Grenvile Combe is a little
property of some ten acres lying between the
grass lane and the road, and bordered on the
North by a fir plantation which extends from
the road to the lane. The cottage, or lodge,
which was then Trethewy’s, stands close to the
Southern corner of the grounds, where the
grass lane turns off; and the gate of the drive
is close by. The stables, which Peters had not
used of late, stand on a detached piece of the
property across the road. The house itself is
near the fir plantation. The back of it looks
out upon a steeply rising pasture field which
lies along the grass lane. The front looks
(across the drive, a strip of lawn and the road)
to the stream and to the church and that ugly
hotel on the little hill beyond. Peters’ study
was in the front of the house at the North-East
corner of the main block of the building, in
other words, it was on your left as you entered
at the front door; and his bedroom was just
above it. A path leads from the drive under
the North wall of the house to the kitchen
entrance, and on the left of this path, as one
goes towards the kitchen, stands an out-building
in which is the pump. A shrubbery of berberis
and box and laurel, starting near the house,
just across the path, skirts round the blind end
of the drive, and straggling along under the
low brick wall, which separates the drive and
front lawn from the fir plantation, ends at a fine
old yew tree which stands just by the road.
All along the front of the house there is a
narrow “half area,” intended to give so much
light and air, as servants were once held to
deserve, to the now disused dungeons where
the dinners of former owners had been cooked.</p>

<p>In that area right below the unlatched window
we saw a ladder lying, a short light ladder, but
just long enough for an active man to have
reached the window by it. Now the snow had
come with a North-East wind, and any one who
may have wrestled with my essay in topography
will readily understand that just here was a
narrow tract where very little snow had fallen
and the frozen ground was mostly bare. There
was accordingly no clear indication that the
ladder had ever actually been reared towards
the window, but it might have been. The path
to the kitchen door was clear enough too, and a
man might have picked his way just thereabouts
and left not a footprint behind. Casting about
like a hound, the Superintendent had found some
footprints near, before his companions had begun
seeking; footprints pointing both ways. He
immediately returned to the house and got some
bundles of chips for kindling, with which to
mark the place of the footprints he discovered.
Callaghan had joined us, and he and I and the
Sergeant followed the Superintendent, keeping,
as he bade us, carefully a little behind him. In
a moment it was plain that some man had
climbed the wall out of the fir plantation, not
far from the yew tree, that he had crept along
the edge of the lawn, planting his feet most of
the way under the edge of the berberis shrub,
but now and then, for no obvious cause, but
perhaps in guilty haste, deviating on to the
lawn where his tracks now showed in the snow.
He had made his stealthy way, not quite stealthy
enough for him, round the end of the drive; no
doubt he had found the ladder somewhere up
that side path, no doubt he had opened the
latch in the well-known way, entered through
the window, done the deed, slipped out and left
his ladder where we found it; and there were
his footprints, returning by the way he came to
the same point in the wall.</p>

<p>Here we paused for a moment. Not a word
was said as to the inferences that we all drew
from those few footprints, but the Superintendent
sharply asked the Sergeant, “Why was that trail
not found and followed to an end this
morning?” Poor Sergeant Speke looked for an
instant like a detected criminal, but he pulled
himself together and made sturdy answer: “I
think, sir, it was not there this morning”.
“Think!” said the Superintendent, and in a
very few minutes from the discovery of the
first footprint, he and all of us were over the
wall and in the fir plantation. And there we
paused again, for the fir boughs also had kept
out the snow, and the carpet of fir needles
showed no distinct traces of feet. Eventually—it
seemed a long time but it was a short
time—we found where the fugitive had emerged
from the fir plantation over some iron hurdles
into Peters’ field and along a little sort of gulley
that there ran from the plantation half-way
along the field. “Not the best place to break
cover, but their wits are not always about them,”
said the Superintendent, and he pointed to a
wedge-shaped snowless tract which, caused by
some extra shelter from the wind, extended
from the wall, tapering towards a clump of
gorse bushes. Then he sped on the trail,
making the rest of us spread out to make sure that
there were no other tracks across the field.
Southwards, right along the field, the trail led
till he, and we rejoining him, scrambled out of
the field, where our quarry must have scrambled,
into the green lane about two hundred yards
from Trethewy’s cottage. Thus far, but no
farther; along the now well-trodden snow of
the lane it was idle to look for the print of any
particular foot. “I am thinking of the hours
of lost daylight,” said the Superintendent, now
depressed. “Was this a likely way for a man
making for the moors, Rector?” “You need
not look that far,” said Callaghan; “those
footprints were the man Trethewy’s. Down at the
cottage yonder,” he added for the Superintendent’s
benefit. “They are the track of hobnailed
boots, sir,” said the Superintendent, “that’s all
that they are.” “Do you see that pattern?”
said Callaghan; and there was something odd
about the pattern of the nails in the last
footprint just beneath our eyes. “You never saw it
in any footprint before, but I did, and it is the
pattern I saw in Trethewy’s footmark not a
fortnight ago when last there was snow.” He
was strung up again now, and he had strangely
quick eyes when he was strung up. “That is
the man’s footprint,” he said, “and there are the
man’s boots.” Some way along the ditch,
under brambles and among old kettles and
sardine tins and worn-out boots (for plentiful
rubbish had been dumped just here), lay quite
a good pair of boots, old boots truly, but not
boots that I should have thrown away, whatever
a poorer man might do. The Superintendent
had them instantly. “Odd they are so full of
snow,” said Callaghan; “he did not lace them
or they were much too big for him. But what
possessed him to throw them away, anyhow?”
“Oh,” said the Superintendent, “they mostly
have plenty of half-clever ideas. It takes a
stupid one to escape me, sir,” he interposed to
me with a sort of chuckle, for he had lost no
more time in appropriating the discovery than
he had done in picking up the boots. “The
clever idea this time,” he added, “was just
this—the lane is trampled enough now, but in the
morning, when fewer feet had been along it, you
might have picked out the print of a particular
boot by careful looking. But a fellow in his
socks could shuffle along among the few
footmarks and make no trace that you could swear
to; only he would not go far like that by
daylight when the people he passed would notice
his feet. Of course it was madness not to hide
the boots better, but I expect he had taken a
good deal of liquor to screw himself up to his
work. Is that Mr. Trethewy’s house, sir?”
for we were by this time close to it.</p>

<p>I had been keen enough, as any man would
have been, from the moment we saw the ladder
till now, but I hope it will be easily understood
why I did not accompany the hunters to
Trethewy’s cottage. I went back to the house
to find Vane-Cartwright, who had stayed there,
as it seemed, reading gloomily and intently
all the afternoon, and to arrange for the
prompt removal of him and Callaghan from
that now cheerless house to the Rectory. The
housekeeper, oddly enough, was quite ready
to stay, and she kept the housemaid with
her.</p>

<p>Callaghan, who soon came back, said that
Trethewy had come to the door of his house
when they knocked. “Mr. Trethewy,” said the
Superintendent, “do you know these boots?”
He answered composedly enough, “They look
like my boots, but I do not know where you
found them”. Here Mrs. Trethewy came
forward and said in a very unconvincing tone (so
Callaghan insisted), “Why, that is the pair I
have looked for high and low these three days.
Do not you remember, Reuben, how angry you
were they were lost?”</p>

<p>We left the house for the Rectory soon (my
man was to come with a barrow for the luggage),
but before we left, one further piece of evidence
had accidentally come to my knowledge. I
learnt from something which the housekeeper
was saying to the maid that the ladder was one
which was always kept in the pump-house, that
the pump-house was always kept locked, and
that Trethewy kept the key.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch05">

<h2>Chapter V</h2>

<p>On Wednesday, the 2nd of February,
Candlemas Day, I read the burial service over my
friend’s body. I will not dwell upon what that
service was to me, but like many funerals of my
friends it is associated in my mind with the
singing of birds. The inquest had taken place on
the Monday and Tuesday, and while it clearly
established the fact that the death had been
caused by murder, not suicide, nothing was laid
before the jury which would have justified a
verdict against any particular person. I believe
that some doubt had arisen as to the
identification of the boots. The village shoemaker, whose
expert opinion was asked, had said that though
he never arranged hobnails in that way himself,
he had seen the same arrangement in boots that
had been brought to him to be repaired, by some
man who was not Trethewy. Later on, however,
it was ascertained, I fancy through Callaghan’s
ingenuity, that Trethewy, who liked dabbling in
various handicrafts, had cobbled and nailed some
boots for a friend, that this friend was the man
whose hobnails had been noticed by the
shoemaker, and that he had been safe out of the way
at the time of the murder. Moreover—perhaps
I forgot it, perhaps I assumed that they would
find it out for themselves and preferred that
they should—anyhow I had not mentioned to
the police that I heard Trethewy alone had had
access to the ladder (they found it out later).</p>

<p>Callaghan and Vane-Cartwright stayed with
me for the funeral. A large crowd of merely
impertinent people, as I confess I regarded them,
collected from the neighbourhood and even from
far away for the occasion. Two only of Peters’
family were there, or could have been there.
He had two nephews in the Army, but they were
then in India. The rest of his near belongings
were an old gentleman (a cousin of his father’s,
whom I had heard Peters himself describe as
a relative whom he had only met at burials,
but whom he regarded as an essential part of
the funeral ceremony) and a maiden aunt, his
mother’s sister. Both of them came; both
insisted on staying at the hotel, instead of at
the Rectory, for the night before, but they had
luncheon and tea at the Rectory after the funeral,
and departed by the evening train. The old
gentleman was, I believe, a retired stipendiary
magistrate. Vane-Cartwright very obligingly
devoted himself to entertaining him and took
him for a walk after luncheon, while Callaghan
roamed about, observing the people who had
come for the funeral, expecting, as he told me,
that there might be something to discover by
watching them. I was thus left alone for a
while with Peters’ aunt, who, by the way,
appeared to have known Vane-Cartwright as
a boy.</p>

<p>Having with some difficulty overcome her
formidable reserve and shyness, I learnt from
her much that I had not known about my friend,
her nephew, how really remarkable had been
the promise of his early days, though he had
idled a little at Oxford; and how he had left
Oxford prematurely and taken up an
appointment abroad, because he felt that his parents
could not well afford to keep him at the
university until he could earn his living in a
profession at home. Of his later life too, including
his latest projects of study, she had much to tell
me, for she had followed him and his pursuits
with an affectionate interest. This contrasted
strangely both with her evident indifference on
her own account to books and such matters as
delighted him, and with the strange calmness
with which she seemed to regard his death and
the manner of his death. I was becoming
greatly attracted by this quiet, lonely old lady,
when the return of the cousin and
Vane-Cartwright and of Callaghan at the same time put
an end to our conversation. Probably it was
only that she did not feel equal to the company
of such a number of gentlemen, but I
half-fancied that some one of the number—I could
not guess which, but I suspected it was the old
cousin—was antipathetic to her.</p>

<p>I went to London myself that night,
returning next afternoon. I had to go and see my
wife and children. They had gone soon after
Christmas to stay with my wife’s father, and
she had taken the children for a night to
London on their way home. She was
compelled to stop there because my daughter, who
was delicate, caught a bad chill. It was now
so cold for travelling that I urged her to remain
in London yet a little longer.</p>

<p>I am not sure why I am being so precise in
recording our movements at that time. Perhaps
it is merely from an impulse to try and live over
again a period of my life which was one of great
and of increasing, not diminishing, agitation.
But having begun, I will proceed.</p>

<p>I returned to my rectory the day after the
funeral hoping to be free from any share in a
kind of investigation which consorted ill with
the ordinary tenour of my work. But of course
I could not remove myself from the atmosphere
of the crime. To begin with, I had an important
interview with Trethewy (which I will relate
later) the day after my return. But, besides,
rumours of this clue or that, which had been
discovered, came to me in the common talk of my
parish, for every supposed step towards the
discovery of the criminal seemed to be matter of
general knowledge. So the crime went with
me in my parish rounds, and in the privacy of
my house I was still less able to escape from
it, for Callaghan was with me, and Callaghan’s
mind was on fire with the subject.</p>

<p>I discovered very soon that Callaghan, whom
I had asked to stay for the funeral, was bent
upon staying in the village as long as he could.
He conceived that, with the knowledge he
possessed and his experience in India, he might, if
on the spot, be able to contribute to the ends of
justice; and he seemed to find a morbid
satisfaction, most unlike my own feeling, in being near
to the scene of crime and the scene of detection.
Moreover, he exhibited an esteem and love for
Peters and a desolate grief at his loss which,
though I had not known that the two men were
quite such friends, I was almost forced to think
unaffected. So I readily invited him to stay at
the Rectory, and he stayed there some ten days
altogether, when he declared that he would put
himself upon me no more and would move to
the hotel. At the last moment he changed his
mind, and said he had taken a fancy to stay at
Peters’ house if he might. I was persuaded to
acquiesce in this, and there he stayed, with
occasional absences in London, till nearly a
month later, shortly after the time when, as I
shall tell, Trethewy was committed for trial at
the Assizes.</p>

<p>Vane-Cartwright, who remained quiet and
reserved, thanked me very much the night
after the murder for having him at the Rectory,
saying, with a feeling that I had not quite
expected, that either to hurry away on that day of
agitation or to stay a night longer in Peters’
house, would have been a trial for him. He
added that he purposed returning to London
immediately after the funeral, and after an
important City meeting, for which he must stay in
England, he was going out to meet his young
lady on the Riviera. I suppose that without
intending I betrayed before the funeral the fact
that I was a little worried by my impending
duties as executor, duties which strangely enough
I had never had to perform before, and in which
I was now a little embarrassed by the absence
from England of my fellow-executor and the
principal legatees, and by the prospect of having
to carry out a charitable bequest which left me
a large discretion and might possibly involve
litigation. Vane-Cartwright very unobtrusively
put me in the way of doing whatever was
immediately incumbent on me. I suppose I
appeared as grateful as I felt; anyhow, it ended
with a delicate suggestion from Vane-Cartwright
that he would be very glad to stay at the hotel
for a day or two and make himself useful to me
in any way that he could. Of course I pressed
him to stay at the Rectory, and, in spite of an
apparent preference for staying at the hotel, he
after a while agreed. I was expecting that I
might soon be leaving home for some time, as
it might be necessary to take my little daughter
for a month abroad in a warmer climate, and
after that I knew I should be very busy with
Confirmation classes and other matters, so that
I was anxious to make immediate progress, if I
could, with winding up Peters’ estate, and was
very glad that Vane-Cartwright would stay, as
he did stay, at the Rectory. On the Saturday
however (a week after the murder) he received
a telegram which compelled him to leave that
afternoon. I had by this time begun to like
him, which I confess I did not at first; men of
his stamp, who have long relied on themselves
alone and been justified in their reliance, often
do not show their attractive qualities till the
emergency occurs in which we find them useful.</p>

<p>Trethewy was arrested the day that
Vane-Cartwright left. I wondered why he was not
arrested earlier (for there did not seem to be
any real room for doubt that he had made those
footmarks), but I have never ascertained, and
can only guess that the police felt sure of
securing him if he attempted to escape, and hoped
that, if left alone, he might betray himself by
such an attempt or otherwise. He never did.
He sat in his cottage, as I gathered, constantly
reading the Bible, but once or twice a day pacing
thoughtfully and alone up and down the drive.
He did the few necessary jobs for the house
with punctuality, but he never lingered in it,
never visited the field or the lane, and hardly
spoke to any one, except on the day before his
arrest, when, to my astonishment (for he was
known to be hostile to the Church), he sent for
me, and we had the memorable interview to
which I have already referred.</p>

<p>During the days before his arrest, as well as
after, all sorts of enquiry, of which I knew little,
were going on. Thalberg’s movements after the
murder were traced. Some attempt was made,
I believe, to find the man who, according to
Trethewy, had passed him with two horses in
the lane. But there seems to have been some
bungling about this, and the man, about whom
there was no real mystery (he was a farm
servant who had started off early to take a horse,
which his master had sold, to its new owner),
was not then found. Two important discoveries
were made about Trethewy. After his arrest
his cottage was searched, and he was found to
be the possessor of inconceivably miscellaneous
articles. Among them were several weapons
which he might naturally have picked up on
his travels, but among them (which was more
to the point) was a small case of surgical
instruments. Two instruments were missing
from that case, and the instrument used by
the murderer might, though not very neatly,
have fitted into one of the vacant places. The
case was found, as Callaghan, who contrived to
be present, told me, at the back of a shelf in
a cupboard filled with all sorts of lumber and
litter that had lain there who can say how
long. Callaghan, however, professed to have
observed, from marks on the dust of the shelf,
that the contents of the cupboard had been
recently disturbed, in order, he had no doubt,
to hide the instrument case at the back of
everything.</p>

<p>The other new discovery had occurred two
days before. Trethewy’s uncle and the guests
who had been at his party on that ill-omened
night were of course sought and questioned.
They all corroborated Trethewy’s own account
of his movements, but they added something
more. Trethewy it seemed had been normal
and cheerful enough as the evening began,
but, as the night and the drinking went on,
fell first into melancholy, then into sullenness,
lastly and a little before he went home into
voluble ferocity. He recurred to the topic,
to which his uncle said he had more than once
alluded on previous days when he had met
him, of his quarrel with Peters, against whom
he had conceived an irrational resentment, and
he actually, though those who heard him did
not take him seriously at the time, uttered
threats against his life.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch06">

<h2>Chapter VI</h2>

<p>I was told of this behaviour of Trethewy’s by
Sergeant Speke the day after the arrest. But
it was no surprise to me, for I had come
myself to communicate to the police something
to the same effect. On mature reflexion I
had thought it my duty to report the matter of
the interview which I had had with Trethewy
some days before. Trethewy had, unsolicited,
made a confession to me—not a confession of
crime, but a confession of criminal intent.</p>

<p>Unchecked by a warning that I could promise
no secrecy as to what he should say, and a
reminder of, what he knew full well, that he was
in a position of grave danger, he declared to
me that he had harboured the thought of killing
his master, and, though he had never actually
laid hands on him, was as guilty as though he
had done so. Starting with this declaration he
plunged into a long and uninterrupted discourse
of which I should find it impossible, even if I
wished it, to give an at all adequate report.</p>

<p>As for the matter of his statement: if one
were to accept it as true, it was the tale, common
enough two centuries ago, but so rarely told now
that modern ears find it very hard to take it in,
the tale of the ordinary struggle between good
and evil in a man, taking an acute and violent
form, so that the man feels day by day the
alternate mastery of a religious exaltation, which
he believes to be wholly good, and of base
passions, which, when they come upon him,
seem to be an evil spirit driving him as the
steam drives an engine. From the manner of
the statement, it was very hard to gather how
much of it was sincere, impossible to gather
whether or not something worse lay concealed
behind that which was so strangely confessed.
Self-abasement and self-righteousness, the
genuine stuff of Puritan enthusiasm, the adulterated
stuff of morbid religiousness, sheer cant, manly
straightforwardness, pleasure in the opportunity
of preaching and that to the parson,—all these
things seemed blended together in Trethewy’s
talk.</p>

<p>On the most favourable view the story came
to this. A few years before, Trethewy, after a
careless life, had become suddenly impressed by
deep religious feelings, no less than by precise
and inflexible religious views. His conversion,
he trusted, had not left his conduct unaffected,
but though for a time he walked, as he said,
happy in this new light, it had been the
beginning, not the end, of his inward warfare. His
natural ill-temper, that worst sort of ill-temper
which is both sulky and passionate, began to
come upon him again in prolonged fits of intense
wrath, intensified, I suppose, by reaction from the
pitch at which he often strove to live. Besides
this, he gave way at times to a keen pleasure
in alcohol. He was tempted by what he called
a “carnal” pride in the strength of his head for
liquor; and I have sometimes observed that
drink works its worst havoc upon the very men
who may appear to be the least affected by it,
bringing about a slow perversion of the deeper
motives of action, while for a long time it leaves
the judgment unclouded upon those more trivial
and obvious matters in which aberration is
readily detected. Thus at the time of that
altercation with Peters of which Callaghan had
been a witness, Trethewy was already brooding
perversely over some trumpery or altogether
fancied grievance. He was deeply under the
influence of drink at that moment, and did not
know it, but knew he had had enough to make
most men drunk. His very worldly pride had
therefore been the more offended at the
imputation which Peters threw on him. His spiritual
pride was offended too by a rebuke from one,
whom, though originally fond of him, he had
come to regard as a worldling, steeped in mere
profane philosophy. He had been enraged to
the point of desiring Peters’ death, and the threat
which Callaghan reported had been actually
uttered. He had meant, it may be, nearly
nothing by his threat when he uttered it; but,
when once this almost insane notion, of killing
for such a trifle a man whom normally he liked,
had taken shape in words, it recurred to him
every time that he was put out, or that a third
glass of spirits went to his lips. Perhaps it
recurred to him with all the more terrible power
because in better moments his conscience was
horribly alarmed at his having given in, by so
much as one thought, to this suggestion of the
Devil. On the morning before Peters’ death he
had a fresh altercation with him on the occasion
of some trifling oversight in the garden to which
Peters had called his attention, and I was
surprised after what Vane-Cartwright had said to
be told that Vane-Cartwright was present on this
occasion and had heard the insolent language in
which he seems to have addressed Peters. All
day and night after that the evil dream had
been upon him, and he walked home from his
uncle’s that night plotting murder. He awoke
in the morning calmer, but his wrath still
smouldered, till his wife brought him the news
that Peters was murdered, when it gave place
in a moment to poignant grief for Peters. He
could not stir from the cottage; he sat, he tried
to pray, he thought, and he saw himself as he
was—perhaps not quite as he was, for he saw
himself as a man guilty of blood.</p>

<p>He would gladly, I think, have talked with me
of his soul, but, with the suspicion which I had
in my mind, I did not see how I could say much
to him. So, having heard him out, I got away
with some pitifully perfunctory remarks. How
was I to take this confession? Was the mental
history which the man gave of himself a cunning
invention for accounting for the known quarrel
and the known threats? Was the story true
with this grave correction that Trethewy had
carried out his intent? Was it the simple truth
all through? Did it even go beyond the truth
in this, that the man’s thoughts had never been
so black as he made them out? For days these
questions occurred frequently to my mind, but
my real opinion upon them was fixed almost as
soon as I got away from Trethewy. Contrary
to my principles I disliked him, I felt strangely
little sympathy for his spiritual struggles; but I
did not doubt that they were real, and I did not
doubt that he was innocent of the crime.</p>

<p>Before Trethewy was brought before the
magistrates, a letter arrived which excited my
imagination unaccountably, or rather two letters
arrived. The day before Vane-Cartwright had
left, a letter had arrived for Peters, bearing the
postmark of Bagdad. Vane-Cartwright
carelessly opened it. He had, I think, at my
request, on the day when I was away in London,
opened some letters which arrived for Peters’
executors. So he had a good excuse for opening
this. “Well, that is very uninforming,” he said,
passing the letter over to me, with an apology
for his mistake, and laughing more than was
usual with him. Uninforming it certainly was.
“Dear Eustace,” it ran, “I am sorry I can tell
you nothing about it.—Yours, C. B.” Just a
week later, after Vane-Cartwright had left, came
another letter from the same place, in the same
hand, and almost, but not quite, as brief: “Dear
Eustace, This time I will not delay my answer.
Longhurst sailed in the <i>Eleanor</i> and she did not
go down. To the best of my belief she still
sails the seas. I never liked C.—Yours ever,
Charles Bryanston.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch07">

<h2>Chapter VII</h2>

<p>After several remands, the proceedings against
Trethewy before the magistrates came to a close
about the end of February. There was nothing
much to note about these proceedings, which
ended, as I suppose they must have ended, in
his being committed for trial. The reader
knows by this time pretty nearly the whole case
against him. That Peters had been murdered
was certain. The accused had had several
altercations with the murdered man. In one of
them he had expressed a wish to kill him, and
he had repeated this wish to others upon the
fatal night. Footprints had been found which,
as the reader knows, seemed at first sight plainly
indicative of his guilt. Then there was the
ladder. It was undoubtedly kept, before the
murder, locked up in a place of which only
Trethewy had the key. That any one could
have had access to it between the murder and
the discovery of the ladder was a view supported
only by the uncorroborated statement of the
accused that he had left the key of the
pump-house that morning, when summoned to speak
to the police, and had forgotten to go back for
it until the next day. Lastly, the finding of the
instrument case, though not very important, at
any rate disposed of any improbability that
Trethewy would have had such an instrument
as the knife that was used.</p>

<p>I daresay this would have been enough to
hang a man if this was all; and against this
there was nothing to be set, except the
immovable persistency of Trethewy and his wife from
the first in the tale which they told.</p>

<p>Nothing, that is, till after he had been
committed for trial. But the very evening after his
committal, a slight but almost conclusive
circumstance was brought to light, and entirely
altered the aspect of the case. That evening I
received a visit from Peters’ housemaid, Edith
Summers. She had, she said, something on her
mind. She had told a falsehood to the
police-sergeant on the morning after the murder.
She had interrupted the housekeeper to say
that the candle by Peters’ bed had been a long
candle the night before; she had said this
because she had been very severely scolded by
the housekeeper for forgetting to put fresh
candles in the candlestick; and so she had said
what was false, not meaning any harm, but
thinking for the moment (as she now tried to
explain) that it was true, and that she had done
what she had intended. She had confessed to the
housekeeper since, but the housekeeper had only
said she was an impudent girl to have put in
her word then, and had better not put it in again.
She had gone to the court expecting to be a
witness on some small point and determined to
make the matter clear then; but she had not
been called. She had spoken to a policeman,
and had been told to speak to one of the lawyers.
She had tried to get the attention of Trethewy’s
lawyer, but he had been too busy to listen to
her.</p>

<p>I am ashamed to say that listening to her
rather long explanation, I entirely failed to see
the significance of what she told me. I said
something quite well intentioned about the evil
of saying what was not true, and then told the
girl kindly, that I did not think there was any
harm done. But she had thought about it and
was in earnest, and she made me see it in a
moment. There were, she explained, other
candles in the room, but they were new candles,
and they were not lighted that night. From
this and what we already knew the conclusion
was almost inevitable. Peters was murdered
before two inches of ordinary candle, which was
burning at 11.30 <span class="sc">P.M.</span> on the 28th of January,
burnt down.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Stupid as it may seem, I had for some time
been convinced of Trethewy’s innocence, and
yet had never really drawn the necessary inference
from it. Of course with the two premisses
in my mind—Peters was murdered, Trethewy
did not murder him—I had been aware, in a
sense, of the conclusion, but it had taken no
hold of my attention. Now, however, I had
evidence of Trethewy’s innocence, which was no
longer a private intuition of my own, but was
something of which every one must appreciate
the force. Perhaps it was from this, perhaps it
was from the sentimental effect of having the
time of the crime fixed within such narrow limits;
anyhow the thought, “Some one other than
Trethewy murdered Peters,” came upon me
with a sudden horror which could hardly have
been greater if I had only that moment become
aware of the original fact of the murder.</p>

<p>I instantly went over in my mind the list of
those few who were so placed as to lie within
the reach of suspicion. Trethewy could no
longer be suspected. Thalberg surely could
not. I dismissed the two women servants from
my mind immediately. There remained two
men—three men—three men, of whom I was
one. I knew how easily I could clear myself,
for the door had been locked behind me before
that candle was lit. But I was the last man
known to have seen Peters, and my confused
current of thought included me as a man to be
suspected. I asked myself of each in turn, is
he the guilty man? and in each case I answered
no. As I look back now, it seems to me, that
the answer “no” did not come to my mind with
the same whole-hearted conviction in each case.
But I did not in the few moments for which I
then reflected, I did not till long after do more
than go round in this circle: One of us three
men murdered Peters. Was it—— each of us
in turn? No. Could it after all be one of the
servants? No! Was there not then in the
vast region of possibility some way of
accounting for Peters’ death without the guilt of any of
us. The plainest reasons bade me answer yes,
and yet again I answered no. And so back
round the circle.</p>

<p>But the girl was with me and I could not
keep her waiting for ever. I arrested my
mental circle where it began, at the thought:
it seems Peters was murdered while two inches
of ordinary candle, lighted before 11.30 <span class="sc">P.M.</span> on
the 28th of January, burnt out. I started up to
take the girl at once to see the police, but on a
sudden idea I desisted. I wrote a note to the
housekeeper, asking that the girl should again
come to see me at eight in the evening, and I
sent a message to the police-sergeant, asking
him to come at the same time. Of course I
had often interviewed him on parish matters,
and having got him settled into the arm-chair in
my study, in which I could usually put him at
his ease, I fired upon him the question,
“Sergeant, were those tracks, which we found, really
there when you came to Mr. Peters’ house in
the morning?” Now Sergeant Speke was a
very honest man, but he was (most properly, I
am sure) a creature of discipline, and his answer
threw, for me, a flood of light on the problem
how it is that the very best of the police are so
ready to back up one another. He answered
immediately and with conviction: “Well, you
see, sir, it is not for me to judge”. The
answer was on the face of it preposterous. He
alone had searched the front of the house that
morning, and it was for him alone, of all men,
to say whether the tracks were there. He
obviously did not see this at all, and I was
wise enough to let go an opportunity for
moralising to him. I beguiled him, with a glass of
wine and other devices of the tempter, into
feeling himself off duty for the while, and talking
with me as fellow-mortal to fellow-mortal. I
very soon discovered, first, that Sergeant Speke
had searched carefully enough around the house
that morning to have seen the tracks if they
had been there, and, secondly, that the man,
Speke, as distinct from the Sergeant, knew
perfectly well that they were not there.</p>

<p>Not till then did I summon the girl Edith
from the servants’ hall where she was waiting.
I made her tell her tale. I saw the Sergeant take
a due note of it for transmission to those, to me
mysterious, headquarters where I supposed all
such matters were digested. I got the
assurance that Sergeant Speke was really man
enough to see that his own evidence, as to the
non-existence of the tracks that morning, would
be noted and digested too. I dismissed the
Sergeant and Edith, and went slowly to bed.
Did I suspect this person? No! Did I
suspect that person? N—no. At last I determined
that I would not let my suspicions fasten on
any one man, while it might be just as
reasonable that his suspicions should fasten on me.
But my mind remained full of horror and of the
image of a candle-end spluttering out, while the
man, who had lighted it to read by, lay dead in
those bloody sheets. Very, very glad I was
that my wife was at last coming home next day.</p>

<p>I suppose it was from the association of two
female names that my dreams, when at last I
slept, were of nothing more horrible than the
ship <i>Eleanor</i>, which, as the reader remembers,
probably still sailed the seas.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch08">

<h2>Chapter VIII</h2>

<p>With some doubt as to whether it was what I
ought to do, but with no doubt that it was what
I wanted to do, I sought out Callaghan next
morning for a final talk with him before he left;
for he was at last to tear himself away from the
scene which he haunted. I tried on him, I do
not know why, the effects of Edith’s disclosure
without telling him what I now knew about the
tracks. I could see that he accepted the truth
of the girl’s statement, and had grasped, much
more quickly than I had, what it imported. It
was therefore wearisome to me, and, in my then
state of mind, most jarring, that for some time
he persisted in playing with the idea that
Trethewy might still be guilty. He supported
it, as he went on, with more and more
far-fetched arguments, so that my patience was
nearly at an end, when, to my amazement, I
found my friend off at full speed again upon a
fresh track, that of Thalberg. I listened, and
this time seriously, to several things which he
told me about Thalberg, which were new to
me and threw an unpleasant light upon him.
Then I interposed. Thalberg had left the
house with me, and it had been made all but
certain that he went straight to his hotel and
never left it until many hours after the murder
had been discovered. In any case it was not
he who had made those tracks, for he had
certainly kept in his hotel from early morning on
the 29th till he left. And I then told Callaghan
my reason for believing that those tracks were
made in the middle of the day on the 29th.
“My dear friend,” he exclaimed, this time with
all the appearance of earnestness, “I no more
really believe than you do that Thalberg
actually did the deed. He is not man enough.
But I have a method, I have a method. I am
used to these things. I am off to Town now;
I shall be there some time; you know my
address. I mean,” he added grandiloquently,
“to work through all the outside circumstances
and possibilities of the case, and narrow down
gradually to the real heart of the problem; it is
my method.”</p>

<p>Well, there may have been some method in
his madness, for there was certainly some
madness in his method. I took leave of him (after
he had called, that afternoon, to renew
acquaintance with my wife) little foreseeing what his
two next steps would be. He stopped on his
way to London at the county town, where he
went to the county police office to
communicate some information or theory about Thalberg.
He went on to London, as he had said he
would, but, instead of remaining there as he
had said, he suddenly departed next day for the
Continent, leaving no address behind.</p>

<p>We have now arrived at the first week in
March, the several events (if I may include
under the name of events the slow emergence
of certain thoughts in my own mind) which
prepared the way for the eventual solution of
our mystery, occurred at intervals, and in an
order of which my memory is not quite distinct,
during that and the remaining nine months of
the year.</p>

<p>The resolution at which I had arrived, not
to occupy my mind with suspicions, or to regard
the detection of crime as part of my business,
was not a tenable resolution, and it was entirely
dissipated by my wife in a talk which we had
on the first evening after her arrival. I was
aware that she would not be able to share with
me in the determination not to harbour
suspicions of any particular person, but I had
thought she would be averse to my taking
positive steps towards the detection of the
crime. She, however, was indignant at the
idea that I could let things be. “Several
innocent men will be under a cloud all their lives,”
she said, “unless the guilty man is found.
There is Trethewy, I suppose they will let him
out some day; but who is going to employ
him? Not that uncle of his; and we cannot.
Who do you suppose is going to see this through
if you do not?” She was powerfully seconded
in this by a neighbour of ours, now an old man,
who had had much experience as a justice.
“Mr. Driver,” he said, “you may think this is
the business of the police, but remember who
the police are. They do their ordinary work
excellently, but their ordinary work is to deal
with ordinary crime. This was not an ordinary
crime, and it was done by no ordinary man. If
it is ever discovered, it will be by a man whose
education gives him a wider horizon than that
of professional dealers with criminals.”</p>

<p>I do not know how far the reader may have
been inclined to suspect Callaghan (that
depends, I suppose, on whether the reader has
been able to form any idea of his character,
and I myself had not, so far, formed any coherent
idea of his character; there seemed little
coherence in it), but the police certainly had begun
to suspect him.</p>

<p>On a superficial view of the matter there was
every reason to do so. Short of bolting on the
night of the murder, before it was discovered,
he had done all that, theoretically, a guilty man
should have done. He had lost no time
whatever in attempting to put suspicion on one
innocent man. He had striven to intermeddle
officiously in the investigations conducted by the
police. There was more than one apparent lie
in the information he had given. He had
haunted the scene of the crime as though it
fascinated him. When the first innocent man
was cleared, he had at once suggested another
man, who was almost certainly innocent also,
and he had then, after giving false accounts of
his intentions, quitted the country without
leaving his address. Then he was certainly in the
house when the crime was committed. His
movements on the following day were nearly
accounted for, but not so fully that he could not
have made those false tracks. After all it was
a circumstance of deep suspicion that he had
been so quick to recognise the peculiar print
of Trethewy’s boot.</p>

<p>Alas, even to the test <i>cui bono</i>, “that stock
question of Cassius, ‘whom did it profit?’ ”
Callaghan responded ill. I knew, and
somewhat later in reply to an enquiry by the police,
it was my duty to say, that Callaghan was in a
certain sense a gainer by Peters’ death. He
had been a most imprudent investor (not, I
believe, a speculator), and had in his
embarrassment borrowed £2,000 from Peters. Peters,
while living, would not have been at all hard on
him if he had been honestly unable to pay, but
was just the man to have made Callaghan’s life
a burden to him if he thought he was not doing
his best to keep above water. Peters’ will
cancelled the debt, and it was not impossible that
Callaghan knew it. But this last point illustrates
the real weakness of the argument against him.
Nobody could know Callaghan a little and think
that either this interest in the will or any other
point in this hypothetical story of his crime,
however much it might be like human nature, was
in the least like him.</p>

<p>Here, for want of a good description of him,
are a few traits of his sojourn in my parish. He
was, it is true, with difficulty dragged out of a
furious brawl with a gentleman from the North
of Ireland who, he said, had blasphemed against
the Pope. The man had not so blasphemed,
and Callaghan himself was not a Roman Catholic.
On the other hand, he had habitually since his
arrival lain in wait for the school children to
give them goodies and so forth. He assaulted
and thrashed two most formidable ruffians who
were maltreating a horse, and then plastered
their really horrible bruises with so much blarney
that they forgave, not merely him, but the horse.
He had brought for Peters, with infinite pride,
a contraband cargo of his native potheen, a
terrible fluid; and after Peters’ death he would
sit up alone in that desolate house, drinking, not
the potheen, which, in intended charity, he
suggested that I should bestow on the poor in the
workhouse, but Mrs. Travers’ barley water, and
writing a rather good and entirely bright and
innocent fairy story.</p>

<p>This is emphatically not evidence, but it made
me sure of Callaghan’s innocence. Looking at
what I suppose was evidence, I had wondered
whether I was not soft in this, and I brought
the matter to the test of my wife’s judgment.
I knew that, at least at her earlier meetings
with Callaghan, she had disliked him, and, out of
the facts which she knew already, I made what
I flattered myself was a very telling case against
him. It did not disconcert me that the lady,
who, when told of his flight, had trusted he
would remain out of England till she went
abroad, said without much interest, “What
stuff,” and then suddenly kindling, exclaimed,
“What, Robert, are you turning against that
poor man?” When I asked for the reasons
why she scouted the idea of his guilt, she seemed
to consider the request quite frivolous; but at
last I extracted from her a sentence which
expressed what I think was at the root of my own
thought. “Mr. Callaghan,” she said, “is violent
enough to commit a murder and cunning enough
to conceal anything, but I cannot imagine his
violence and his cunning ever working together.”</p>

<p>Of course we both thought of him as sane,
though he was just one of those people to whose
doings one constantly applies the epithet “mad”.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch09">

<h2>Chapter IX</h2>

<p>The enquiry upon which I had now stirred
myself to enter, could not be an easy one, but
it should have seemed for the present to be
narrowed down to a question about a single man.
Perhaps it was from repugnance against
consciously going about to hang a man who had
sheltered under my roof, that I did not even
then definitely put to myself the question of that
man’s guilt. By some half-conscious sequence
of thought I was led to begin my search far afield.
It started with the two letters which had come
for Peters from Mr. Charles Bryanston, or rather
first with the later letter.</p>

<p>I had some time before written briefly and
formally to Mr. Bryanston to acquaint him with
the fact of Peters’ murder, but had, for a while
since, thought no more of him. Now I began
to do what one very seldom does, steadily and
methodically think. I mooned up and down
with a pipe in my garden or in the lanes. I
sat, with those letters in my hand, alone before
the fire. I sat at my writing-table with paper
before me, and made incoherent jottings with a
pencil. I should be afraid to say how often
and how long I did all these seemingly idle
things. Till at last, in the time between tea
and dinner, with the children playing in the
room, I arrived at actually spelling the matter
out.</p>

<p>“This time I will not delay my answer.”
“This time——” Then at other times he
did delay his answer. That might have some
significance when I turned to the earlier letter.
“This time I will not delay my answer.” It
was an answer to a question in a letter just
received from Peters, an answer probably by
return of post. Why not delay it this time as
usual? Why, of course, because the question
was one which both to Peters and to
Bryanston seemed important, perhaps momentous.
Simple enough so far. “Longhurst did sail
in the <i>Eleanor</i>, and she did not go down.”
It was clear enough that some one had thought
that Longhurst had sailed in a ship that did
go down. Peters had thought otherwise, and
Peters was right. What of that? There is
nothing momentous in that. Stop, though. It
is not necessarily that. Some one need not
have thought it—he may have said it to Peters,
and Peters may have thought it was a lie. And
what did it matter, and why did some one say
it? Well, of course, Longhurst would be dead
if the ship had gone down; and Longhurst was
not really dead, and some one was interested
in saying that he was. Perhaps Longhurst
was the next heir to some property, and search
ought to have been made for him; and my
mind wandered over all the stories I had ever
read of lost heirs, in fact or in fiction. Or
perhaps—— Who said Longhurst and his
ship went down? “C.” said it, whoever “C.”
might be.</p>

<p>Then I took up the earlier letter. I knew
from the other letter that this had been sent
late. There was nothing further to be gained
from the words of it, but a flood of suspicion
broke upon me as I held it in my hand. Had
“C.” another initial to his surname, a double
name? Did I know this “C.”? Had I not
seen this very letter in the hands of “C.”?
Had I not thought it rather odd that he, a
man so decidedly “all there,” had opened and
read it before it was given to me? Had I
not rather wondered at the pains he had kindly
taken to help me with several letters before?
Did he not laugh rather strangely as he read
it, though I never heard him laugh at
anything amusing? Did he not go away just after
the letter came, though he had not been
intending to go so soon? Was it conceivable that
he knew that Peters had asked that question,
and thought the first letter (“very
uninforming,” as he called it) was the answer to that
question, and an answer which made him safe?
After that one laugh I thought he became
suddenly downcast. Had he really read in
that letter that he need not have feared
Peters, and that he had—yes, murdered him
for nothing? Had the accident that Peters
had written, perhaps long before, some
unimportant question to Bryanston, and the
accident that Bryanston had delayed his answer
betrayed this man into leaving me alone with
my letters a week too soon; and would this
trifling mistake lead him to—to the gallows?
and I remembered with a start the grim end
which I was preparing. Yes, all this was
conceivable. There is an old maxim that you
should beware of going back upon your first
instinctive impressions of liking or dislike when
you happen to have them. There are
qualifications to it; the repulsions that start from
ugliness or strangeness or difference of opinion
may not be safe guides. But broadly the maxim
is true. It was true in this instance. No, I
too had never liked “C.”</p>

<p>It is strange that I should have received Mr.
Bryanston’s answer the very next morning, a
long, full, warm-hearted letter on the death of
the friend to whose letters in life—and what
letters Peters wrote!—he made such scrappy
replies. In a P.S. at the end, as if the writer
had hesitated whether to write it, were the
words: “It is curious and may be news to you
that Mr. Peters, at the time he was murdered,
was unravelling the mystery of another murder,
committed, as he suspected, many years ago”.</p>

<p>So then, as I had half-guessed, Longhurst
was dead. It was not that he was alive and
Cartwright pretended he was dead, he was
dead, and Cartwright had a motive for falsely
pretending he was drowned.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch10">

<h2>Chapter X</h2>

<p>“Tout comprendre, c’est tout pardonner,” is,
I do not doubt, a saying which has its truth.
Nevertheless, I have generally noticed, when I
have read much about murders or other great
crimes, or about the social or political misdeeds
which are not called crimes, that every piece
of additional knowledge about the manner in
which the thing was done, the inducements that
led to it, the conduct that followed it, has, for
me at least, set the capital act of wrong in
a more hideous light. It is not, I think, that
the picturesque circumstances, like the
guttering candle whose image got on my nerves that
night, affect me profoundly. It is, I believe,
that, while many men, most if you like, are
middling, the distinctly bad are really much
worse and the distinctly good are really much
better than the world of middling people is at
all ready to allow. When I looked at the
whole circumstances of the crime, as I now
conceived them, a great hatred of
Vane-Cartwright possessed my soul. There was a passage
in my subsequent course with regard to him,
when a reason personal to myself had just been
added to the cause of my hate, upon which I
look back sometimes with self-disgust, but I
cannot think that the desire, which first prompted
me to fasten myself upon Vane-Cartwright and
try to drag him down, was an impure desire, or
that it consorted ill with the inner meaning of
those precepts which it was my profession to
teach.</p>

<p>Whether it was right or wrong, the strength
of the feeling which then animated me showed
itself in my resolve to think calmly and to act
circumspectly. I was conscious that the
structure of my theory was held together by no
firm rivets of verifiable fact, but by something
which must be called feeling. I did not distrust
my theory on that account; but I did distrust
myself, and I determined, in what lay before
me, to take as few impulsive steps and to draw
as few impulsive conclusions as I could.</p>

<p>Reflecting, next morning, on what could be
done immediately to bring my hypothesis to
the test of fact, I looked in the <i>Postal Guide</i>
for such information as it gave about the mails
to and from Bagdad. I also verified my
impression as to the date of that occasion when
Vane-Cartwright, staying at the hotel, had spent
the evening with Peters. From what I found
it seemed to me that a letter to Bagdad, posted
that night, might have been expected to bring
an answer back by the date on which the first
letter from Bryanston came to my hands, or
even a few days earlier, but that the delays of
steamers might easily bring it about that an
answer should not arrive till a week later, that
is, when the second letter from Bryanston came
to me. So far then there was nothing to make
my conclusion impossible. I may add here that
the enquiries which I made, as soon as I saw
how to do it, confirmed what I gathered from
the <i>Postal Guide</i>, and showed that on this
occasion such a delay of the mails had actually
happened.</p>

<p>But, assuming this about the mails, what a
frail edifice my theory still remained! Upon
most careful reconsideration, I saw, as the reader
may see, that it fitted in easily with all the known
facts. It was just as well founded as many
things which are taught as established truths of
science or history. But as for expecting the
law to hang Vane-Cartwright upon this, I
myself, fantastically no doubt, refrained a little later
from black-balling him at a distinguished club,
of which, oddly enough, I had in my ambitious
youth become a member. In large part the
case, so to call it, against him rested on my
observations of his demeanour in my house, and
especially of his conduct in regard to my business
as executor and my letters. This was precise
and cogent enough for me, the observer at first
hand; but it was too much matter of general
impression to be of use to any one but me. Then
the attribution of that early murder to
Vane-Cartwright seemed to me absolutely requisite
to make his murder of Peters conceivable. But
it was the work of my imagination. In the
region of palpable facts, one thing alone was
evidence against Vane-Cartwright and not
against any other man. It will be remembered
that, when Callaghan first denounced Trethewy,
Vane-Cartwright said that Trethewy’s behaviour
in his presence to Peters had been friendly and
respectful. He knew, I now told myself, a better
way than expressing suspicion of Trethewy, and
while by his stealthy act he fabricated evidence
against him, he contrived by his words to cast
on Callaghan alone the risk of thereafter
appearing as an innocent man’s traducer. But
his cunning had made a slip. It was gratuitous
in doing so to have uttered a refutable lie as to
Trethewy’s conduct in his presence. He was
not the man to have seen the imprudence of
this. It would have been to him inconceivable
that Trethewy should confess the full extent of
his wrong conduct to me. And so, not from
any want of coolness, he had provided me with
the one scrap of ordinary evidence necessary to
give firmness to that belief of mine which might
otherwise have seemed a mere bubble.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch11">

<h2>Chapter XI</h2>

<p>By the time that my wife, who had been again
obliged to be in London while I was spelling
out this story, had returned, I had long come
to the conclusion that my theory had enough
in it to be worth submitting to her criticism.
But she forestalled me with news of her own,
and news which concerned Vane-Cartwright.
The young lady, Miss Denison, whom he was
to have married had suddenly broken off the
engagement within two days of his joining
her upon the Riviera. The girl could give
no good reason for her conduct, and her own
people loudly condemned it; they had been
against the engagement, for the difference of
age was too great; they were still more against
the flighty breach of it; but she was obdurate.
She and her people returned home for Easter,
and my wife, who had already known her a
little, now met her several times at the house
of a common friend in London. The foolish or
unhappy young lady had given my wife her
confidence. Far from having any suspicion
about the murder, she had never even heard,
when she made her decision, that there had
been a murder at all; for she and her mother
did not read news of that order, and
Vane-Cartwright, though he had said that he had
been through a dreadful experience, of which
he was anxious to tell her, had not yet said
what it was. There had evidently been a
quite unaccountable quarrel in which the
high-tempered girl had, in all things external, begun,
continued and ended in the wrong; and she did
not now defend herself. Somehow, she said,
he was changed. No, not in his manner to her;
she had not doubted his attachment to her.
Only she had thought she had loved him before,
and she knew now that she did not. Something,
which she had seen in him before but not
disliked, now jarred upon her feelings in a new
way. She had been very, very foolish, very,
very wrong; she could explain nothing; she
was very unhappy, very angry with herself; but
this she knew, and this alone she knew, that it
would be wrong for her to become William
Vane-Cartwright’s wife.</p>

<p>So much my wife told me. Then, with that
precipitancy in travelling to remote conclusions
which sometimes seems so perilous in able
women, she said, as quietly as if it were the
most obvious comment, “Robert, it was
Vane-Cartwright that did the murder”. Now she
had never even spoken to him.</p>

<p>Accordingly, she received my theory of the
murder almost with enthusiasm. None the less,
she immediately put her finger upon the weakest
part of it. “I wonder, all the same,” she
exclaimed, “why he murdered Eustace?” “Why,”
I said, “he saw in a moment that Eustace knew
he was lying and suspected him of the murder.”
“That would not have been enough,” she said;
“he must be a very cool-headed man from the
way he behaved after the murder, and he would
never have run the risk he ran by a second
murder, if there had not been much more than
suspicion of the first.” “Then,” I suggested,
“perhaps Eustace already knew it, and the lie
he told only provoked Eustace into showing
it.” “If,” she replied, “Eustace knew it, he
would never have had him within his doors.”
“Well,” I said wearily, because I could not
immediately see how to answer, “perhaps he
did not murder Eustace.” Then she turned on
me with a woman’s promptitude and a woman’s
injustice: “You can always argue me down,”
she said, “but he did murder Eustace Peters,
and you have got to find out all about it and
bring him to justice. I am sure you have the
ability to do it. You may have to wait, but, if
you wait patiently and keep your eyes open, all
sorts of things will turn up to help you. I shall
be very angry with you,” she added, in a tone
not at all suggestive of anger, “if you do not
do it.”</p>

<p>I felt, like my wife, that it was a matter of
waiting for what would turn up. In the
neighbourhood of the murder there was probably very
little to turn up. The police, I felt no doubt, had
made all manner of enquiries; and as for
anything that I was likely to pick up, I supposed
I had already heard all, and more than all that
any person in the neighbourhood knew about
the matter. I may anticipate a little and say
that in the whole of the four months, which, as
it proved, were all that remained to me as Rector
of Long Wilton, no fresh information was given
to me by my neighbours there. It soon occurred
to me that the murder of Longhurst, far away
and long ago, might be easier to trace than the
recent, but perhaps more carefully veiled, crime
committed to cover it. Peters, I reasoned, must
have been in possession of proofs of it, and
probably, as I searched his voluminous papers,
something would appear to indicate the nature
of those proofs. I began, as in any case I
should have done, a careful reading of his
papers. It took up no small part of my spare
time, for I found that he had prepared little
enough for immediate publication, but fuller
and more valuable materials for his projected
book of psychology than I should at all have
expected from his manner of proceeding. But,
of what now interested me more than my friend’s
philosophy, I found nothing in all this mass of
letters and notes and journals; nothing, that
is, which threw direct light on this mystery, for
indeed his psychological notes and my
discussions with a friend of his, an Oxford philosophy
tutor, to whom I eventually committed them,
did, I think, influence me not a little in one
important part of my enquiry later.</p>

<p>In pushing enquiries further afield there was
need for some caution. An indiscretion might
have brought what I was doing unnecessarily
soon to the notice of the suspected man, and
the great ability with which I credited him
might suggest some effective scheme for baffling
my search. But of course I wrote early to Mr.
Bryanston to ask if he would tell me to whom
he alluded as “C.,” whether Longhurst was the
man whom Peters suspected had been murdered,
and whether I inferred rightly that “C.” was
involved in this suspicion.</p>

<p>It was my duty to put all that I knew at the
disposal of the police, and the opportunity for
doing so soon presented itself in the visit, which,
as I have said, was paid to me to enquire about
Callaghan. My visitor was an important official,
since dead, whom I need not more clearly
indicate. He had been a military man, and he
struck me as, in some ways, admirably qualified
for his post. He was, I believe, excellent in
the discipline he maintained among his
subordinates and in all the dispositions he made for
meeting the common public requirements. I
am told also that he had wonderful familiarity
with the ways of ordinary law-breakers, but he
did not appear to me to have much elasticity
of mind. After answering fully his question
about Callaghan, I thought it right to give my
own impression of his innocence. My visitor
answered me with a somewhat mysterious
reference to those who really guided the conduct of
the affair. He could not himself, he said, go
behind their views. Then with an evident
sympathy for my concern about Callaghan, he
told me in confidence and still more
mysteriously that the opinion of an eminent specialist
had been taken.</p>

<p>I then ventured to press the question of
Trethewy’s release, and learnt that it was being
carefully considered, but he could not be set free
immediately. Then I told my visitor of the
statement of Vane-Cartwright when Callaghan
first spoke of Trethewy, and how Trethewy’s
confession proved this to have been a deliberate
falsehood. I showed him and gave him copies
of the letters of Bryanston to Peters and to me.
I informed him, and at my request he noted, that
Vane-Cartwright had opened the first letter.
I stated what I had myself observed of
Vane-Cartwright’s conduct, and indicated frankly the
conclusion which I was disposed to draw. It
did not seem to me that I produced any
impression. My visitor listened, if I may say so, with
the air of a man who completely takes in the
fact and sees that it should be put in some
pigeon-hole, but is without either apprehension
or wonder as to its real bearing. I gathered,
on the whole, that the official mind was chiefly
taken up with the theory that Callaghan was
guilty; but that there was also thought to be
an off-chance that something might yet turn up
to repair the seemingly shattered case against
Trethewy. I gathered too, and, I hope, gave
due weight to the fact, that there was some likely
way, of which I had before heard nothing, by
which an unknown person might have entered
and escaped from the house that night. One
thing more I learnt; nothing suspicious had been
discovered about Thalberg’s movements, but it
appeared, and this seemed to be considered as in
his favour, that he had a great deal to do with
Vane-Cartwright.</p>

<p>After my visitor had taken courteous leave of
me, it dawned upon me what was meant by his
dark sayings about Callaghan. I had wondered
how the opinions of an eminent specialist in
police matters could be so cogent in a case about
which he knew nothing at first hand. Suddenly
it occurred to me that the eminent specialist
really was a physician well versed in the
symptoms of insanity. The police then were not
being guided by those superficial and so to
speak conventional notes of guilt, of which I had
thought, to the exclusion to all those sides of
character which I had noted. On the contrary
they had a view of their own on which these
two conflicting sets of phenomena might be
reconciled, a view which explained why Callaghan
was to me so inexplicable. The man was not
sane.</p>

<p>I could not conceal from myself that there
was at least something plausible in this view.
There is a sort of marked eccentricity and, as it
were, irresponsibility of conduct of which I had
always thought as something not merely
different from incipient madness but very far removed
from it. Yet I had once before been terribly
mistaken in thinking thus about a friend, and
I might, I reflected, be mistaken now. The
natural effect upon me was, or should have
been, a keener sense of the unsubstantial nature
of the story which I had built up about
Vane-Cartwright. But I believed it still.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch12">

<h2>Chapter XII</h2>

<p>In the course of the summer my wife and I paid
our annual visit together to London, and I had
a few days in Oxford before the end of the
summer term.</p>

<p>I heard a good deal about Vane-Cartwright
in London, for he had become a man of some
mark in society, and moved in a little set, which
was known among its members by a rather
precious name, now forgotten though celebrated
in the gossip of that time, and which included
a statesman or two of either party and several
men of eminence in letters, law or learning.
By a strange coincidence of the sort which is
always happening, I met at an evening party
a friend who mentioned Longhurst, and I had
just heard from him something of no moment
about this man whose fate so deeply exercised
me, when I saw Vane-Cartwright himself
standing in another part of the throng. I took the
opportunity of watching him, unobserved myself,
as I supposed. I have hitherto forborne to
describe his appearance, because such
descriptions in books seldom convey a picture to me.
But I must say that seen now in a room where
there were several distinguished people, he made
no less impression on me than before. He was,
I should say, five foot eleven in height, thin and
with a slight stoop, but with the wiry look
which sometimes belongs to men who were
unathletic and perhaps delicate when young,
but whose physical strength has developed in
after years. Hair which had turned rather
grey, while the soft texture and uniformly dark
hue of his skin still retained a certain beauty of
youth, probably accounted for a good deal of
his distinction of appearance, for he was not
handsome, though his forehead, if narrow, was
high, and his eyes which were small were
striking—of a dark greenish-grey colour, I think.
The expression of the mouth and of the
clear-cut and firm-set jaw was a good deal hidden by
a long though rather thin moustache, still black.
I had time while he stood there to notice again
one trick, which I already knew; he was, I
supposed, bent upon being agreeable, so he was
talking with animation, and when, in so talking,
he smiled and showed his white teeth, his
eyelashes almost completely veiled his eyes. To
me, naturally, it gave him a hateful expression,
yet I could see a certain fascination about it.
Then he moved farther off—very quietly, but I
could see as he made his way through the crowd
that in reality every motion was extraordinarily
quick.</p>

<p>Some ten minutes after, I was about to go,
when he suddenly came from behind and
addressed me, asking me to choose a day for
dinner or luncheon at his club. I declined, and
freed myself as courteously and as quickly as I
could, and thought, for the moment, that there
had been nothing marked in the way in which,
obeying irresistible impulse, I had shaken off
the man whom I suspected on such slight
grounds but so rootedly.</p>

<p>A few days afterwards a great robbery was
attempted at Vane-Cartwright’s house. The
robbers were after a well-chosen and valuable
collection of gold ornaments of early periods or
from strange countries, which he had begun to
make. It was reported in the papers that the
theft had been with great presence of mind
interrupted and prevented by the owner of the
ill-guarded treasures. But the robbers
themselves got away. The matter was much talked
of, and conflicting tales were told about it, but it
seems that Vane-Cartwright, hearing some
unusual noise, had come downstairs and surprised
the two men who had entered the house before
they had succeeded in removing any of their
spoil. As he came down he had rung up the
police by the District Messenger Company’s
apparatus which was in the house. Coming
quietly upon them, and standing in the dark
while they were in full light, he had first ordered
them to hold up their hands, and had then made
each of them singly turn out his pockets and
restore the smaller stolen articles which they
had already secreted in them. He then, it was
said, kept them standing there to await the
police. But, by some ruse, they distracted his
attention for a moment, and then, suddenly
putting out their light, made a rush past him
and escaped. Such at any rate appears to have
been the information which he gave to the police
who arrived soon after. The police actually
arrested two men, already known to them as
suspicious characters, who had been observed
lurking near the house together and afterwards
slinking away separately, and they were at first
confident that they had secured the authors of
the attempted robbery. But Vane-Cartwright
not only could not identify the arrested men as
the two housebreakers, whom he had of course
seen well; he insisted firmly that they were not
the men whom he had seen; nor were the right
men ever caught. The matter caused some
surprise, and the police were freely blamed for
their bungling. I have my own reason for
doubting whether they were justly blamed.</p>

<p>It is a mere fancy on my part that this
incident and my meeting with Vane-Cartwright a
few days before may have had a connexion
with each other and with certain subsequent
events in this history. I fear that my
experience in that year and the next has made me
ready to see fanciful connexions; and the
reader, when he knows of those subsequent
events, will see what I suspect took place upon
the discovery of the theft, but will very likely
think my suspicion extravagant. However that
may be, Vane-Cartwright’s plucky adventure
and the celebrity which it helped to give to his
artistic collections, caused me to hear all the
more of him during my stay in London.</p>

<p>Curiously, however, it was at Oxford, where
he had not distinguished himself, that the fame
of Vane-Cartwright was most dinned into my
ears. The University is apt to be much
interested in the comparatively few of her sons whose
road to distinction is through commerce; and,
moreover, he had lately given to the University
Museum a valuable collection of East Indian
weapons, fabrics, musical instruments and what
not, which he had got together with much
judgment. Thus it happened that I heard
there one or two things about him which
were of interest to me. A friend of mine, an
old tutor, the Bursar of the college at which
Vane-Cartwright had been, described him as
he was in his undergraduate days. He had,
in his opinion, been badly brought up, had
never gone to school, but been trained at
home by parents who were good people with
peculiar views, highly scientific and possibly
highly moral views. He had not fallen into
either of the two common classes of
undergraduates which my old friend understood
and approved—the sportsmanlike and boyishly
fashionable class, or the studious class who
studied on the ordinary lines; still less into the
smaller, but still not small, class which
combines the merits of the two. He had
attainments of his own, which the old tutor did not
value sufficiently, for he was proficient in
several modern languages and modern
literatures; moreover, the necessary mathematics,
Greek and Latin grammar, formal logic, etc.,
which he had to get up, gave him not the
slightest trouble. Altogether he had plenty of
cleverness of his own sort, but it was a sort
which the Bursar thought unwholesome. He
was quite well conducted, and ought to have
been a gentleman, coming of the family of
which he came, but somehow he was not quite
a gentleman. Thus it was a great surprise to
the possibly conventional instructor of his youth
that he had done so well in the world.</p>

<p>Then I heard of him from another man,
justly esteemed in financial circles, who was on
a visit to his son at Oxford, and whom I met in
a common-room after dinner. Somebody had
hazarded the remark that Vane-Cartwright
must have been either a very hard worker or a
very lucky speculator. “No,” said this
gentleman, who was a colleague of his on the Board
of one of the only two companies of which he
was a director, “I should not say that a man
like that worked hard as you would understand
work at Oxford, or at least as a few of you would.
His hard work was done when he was young.
Most of his business is what one of his clerks
could run, and probably does run, for many
weeks together, on lines which he has planned
very carefully and revises whenever occasion
requires. Nor is he what most people would
call a speculator. I fancy he very seldom takes
any uncommon sort of risk, but he always does it
at the right moment. He has succeeded because
he is very quick in making his calculations and
very bold in taking action on them. He does
not seem to be constantly watching things, but
when a special emergency or a special
opportunity occurs he seems to grasp it instantly, and
I believe he troubles himself very little, too
little perhaps, about any affair of his when it is
once well in train.”</p>

<p>Lastly, I heard a story, the narrator of
which could give me few precise details, of the
pains which Vane-Cartwright had taken to
search out the few relations of an old partner
of his in the East who had died before their
affairs turned out so successfully, and of the
generosity with which he had set up these people
in life though they had very little claim on him.
Here at least was something which took its
place in the story which I was weaving; the
rest of what I had heard was little to the
purpose, though it served to give life and colour to
my idea of the man’s character.</p>

<p>Now, however, I was really to discover
something definite. When we returned to our home
at Long Wilton, only a little before we finally
left it, I completed my examination of Peters’
papers. His various diaries and notebooks,
notes of travel and notes of study, jottings and
completed passages for his psychological book,
I found to be of fascinating interest, and I
lingered over them long, but there was not
a hint among them all of Longhurst,
the <i>Eleanor</i> or any kindred topic. One of the
journals, I noticed, had had some leaves cut out.
The last place of my search was a small wooden
trunk which I had brought home from his
house (now sold). On the top of it lay a sheet
of paper with, written in his mother’s hand,
“Some little things which I have put aside for
Eustace. His wife or his children may care to
see them hereafter.” It may have been from
a false sense of pathos, but my eyes filled with
tears, and I was indisposed to rifle callously these
relics so lovingly put aside with natural hopes
which now could never be fulfilled. I was about
to make a bonfire of the box and all its
contents, reverently but with speed, when my wife
arrested me in amazement at my folly. “Why,”
she said, “cannot you see? His letters to his
mother will be in it.” “His letters from the
East,” she added, as I still did not comprehend.
And they were in it.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch13">

<h2>Chapter XIII</h2>

<p>I here set down in order of their date several
extracts from Peters’ letters to his mother written
from Saigon in the years 1878 to 1880.</p>

<p><i>First Extract:</i> “I have a new acquaintance,
one Willie Cartwright, a young fellow who was
at Oxford just after me. I spend a good deal
of time with him because of talking Oxford
shop and because he is fond of books; at least
he was brought up among them, and reads the
books he thinks he ought to read. I have not
got very much in common with him, for he is
a narrow-shouldered, bilious-looking, unathletic
fellow, with no instinct of sport in him; but
he is a welcome addition to my circle, because
he is refined—in a negative way at least—and
most of my friends’ conversation here is—well,
not refined, and it becomes a bore.”</p>

<p><i>Second Extract:</i> “How curious that you
should have known some of young Cartwright’s
people, for it is W. V. Cartwright. I thought
they must have lost their money since I heard of
him at Oxford. Yes, I will try to ‘take care
of him’ a little, as you say, but really, though
he is quiet and not sociable among men, he
is by no means a timid youth, and he has
quite got the name of a shrewd business man
already.”</p>

<p><i>Third Extract:</i> “I am rather sorry about
Willie Cartwright. He seems to have got into
the hands of a fellow named Longhurst, who has
lately turned up here, no one knows why. He,
Longhurst, is a rough customer whom no one
seems to know anything about, except that he
has been in Australia. He has been a mining
engineer, and seems to know also a lot about
tropical forestry. He has wonderful yarns of
the discoveries he has made in the Philippines,
the Dutch Indies and all over the shop. I
should not believe his yarns, but he seems to
have made a little money somehow. Well,
Cartwright now talks of becoming a partner
with him in some wild-cat venture, and I am
afraid he will get let in. He says himself he
thinks Longhurst will try to do him. He had
much better stick to his humdrum business
here, which will give him a living at any rate,
and perhaps enable him to retire comfortably
when he is, say, forty-five, young enough to
enjoy life, though one does age soon in this
climate.”</p>

<p><i>Fourth Extract:</i> “Cartwright and
Longhurst have actually gone off together. Parker,
whom Cartwright was with, is very sick about
it. . . . By the way, I ought to confess I was
quite wrong about Longhurst. I have seen a
good deal of him since, and found him a very
kind fellow, with an extraordinary simplicity
about him in spite of all his varied experiences.
I generally assume that when a man is spoken
of as a rough diamond, the roughness is a too
obvious fact, and the diamond a polite
hypothesis, but I was wrong in Longhurst’s case.
Also I think you may reassure C.’s aunt about
the chances of his being swindled. In strict
confidence I think the chances are the other
way. MacAndrew, the lawyer here, told me a
story he had no business to tell about the
agreement between . . .” (Part of letter lost.)</p>

<p>This was all. Peters before long was moved
to Java; and the letters to his mother ceased
soon after, for she died.</p>

<p>Not long afterwards I got Bryanston’s answer
to my letter of enquiry to him. He told me little
but things of which by this time I was sure.
“C.” was Cartwright (William V. Cartwright,
he called him), and was, he conjectured, the man
whom Peters connected with Longhurst’s death.
He would be glad to tell me at any time
anything that he could, but he was off now for a
sea voyage which the state of his health made
necessary (a long absence immediately before
accounted for some delay in his answering me),
and at present he could think of nothing to tell
me but what I should see in Peters’ letter to
him, of which he was keeping the original and
now enclosed a copy.</p>

<p>The important part of the letter enclosed was
as follows: “I have a question to ask you
which perhaps you will answer this time by
return of post. Never mind my previous
question about the old Assyrians. You will
remember the time in 1882 when you were at
Nagasaki, and you will remember Longhurst’s
being there and his sailing. After his
disappearance it got about naturally that he sailed in
that unhappy ship the <i>William the Silent</i>, which
went down in a cyclone. Now I have a distinct
recollection that when I met you, some months
after that, you told me that you had seen
Longhurst with Cartwright at Nagasaki, that
you saw them off, and that they both sailed
together in the same ship. I have forgotten
the name of the ship you mentioned, but it was
a ship with some female name, and it belonged
to your people. Will you please tell me at once
if my recollection is right. As for my reason
for asking, I expect I told you fully my reasons
for believing that Longhurst died by some foul
play. I may have told you the suspicion which
I had as to who did it. It was a suspicion for
which I was sorry afterwards, for I saw reason
to think it quite unfounded. But I have just
seen a man, whom I need not name, who must
have known when and how Longhurst sailed
from Nagasaki; and he astonished me by
saying that he sailed in the <i>William the Silent</i>.
Now one of three things: either I have got
muddled in my recollection as to what you said,
or, which I can hardly believe, I was mistaken
in my identification of the body which I exhumed
from the tomb which the chiefs showed me, or
I was right in both points, and then a conclusion
seems to follow which I shrink very much from
drawing. There is one other matter of fact
which I suspect and which I can easily verify,
which would absolutely fix the guilt on the
man I allude to, but I want to make quite
sure from you that my memory is right as to
Longhurst’s sailing. A suspicion of my man’s
guilt came to me as I have said, long ago, but
after making some enquiries I dismissed it
summarily, for I have, or ought to have, a sort of
hereditary friendship with him.”</p>

<p>So then my hypothesis had been further put
to the test of facts, and again some of the points
which I had guessed had proved to be true. It
was no longer only a fanciful imagination of my
own, but a suspicion which any sane man with
the facts before him must feel, and feel very
strongly. There was more than enough
evidence for any sensible historian, for a lawyer
there was still none at all.</p>

<p>In September the time came that we were to
leave Long Wilton for good. We then moved
to a country parish, which, though deep in the
country, is yet very near to London (and I
thenceforward often came to town). Naturally
leaving one parish and getting into another, not
to speak of the change of house, filled my whole
time with work to be finished now or never,
and with arrangements which must instantly be
set on foot for future work.</p>

<p>Before the close of the year 1896 (I think it
was late in October, anyway it was some time
after I had settled into my new parish), a further
record of the sort for which I have been looking
came to light. It was my business as executor
to sell certain securities which had belonged to
Peters, and for a long time there was a difficulty
in finding with whom those securities were
lodged. Eventually, however, they were found
in the hands of the firm who had been his agents
while he was absent in the East, and in sending
them to me, the firm sent also a packet which
they told me had been deposited with them for
safe keeping in the year 1884, on the occasion of
a brief visit home which Peters had made. The
packet was a large envelope on which was
written “Notes on the affair of L.” On opening
it I found first two maps drawn by Peters.
The one was a rough copy of a map of the
island Sulu, in the Philippines. The other a
map on larger scale, very carefully drawn,
apparently from Peters’ own survey, of a small
portion of the island. It was inscribed “Chart
showing the spot where the tomb of a dead
white man was shown me by the two chiefs”.
Next I found a number of sheets taken out of
Peters’ journal, kept in the year 1882 in the
months of July and August. From this it
appeared that Peters had at that time
accompanied one Dr. Kuyper, who seemed to have
been a naturalist, upon a cruise in the Philippines,
and that they had come to a village upon the
coast of the island, where the Filipinos informed
them that a month or so before, a European,
they thought an Englishman, had come down
from somewhere inland, with several Malay and
Chinese servants, and had requested assistance
in burying the body of his companion. The
dead man, he stated, had been killed by a fall
from some rocks. The Filipino chiefs had told
Peters that the servants, who had not been
present when the fall took place, were much
excited, and seemed suspicious about it, but that
the manner and the answers of the European
traveller had allayed their own suspicion.
Something, however, seems to have aroused suspicion
in Peters and Kuyper, for they disinterred the
body. Peters’ journal proceeded to record certain
facts about the body, the clothing, etc. (in
particular the fact that a finger was missing on one
hand), which had led Peters to identify the body
as that of his former acquaintance, Longhurst.
He recorded also that they had found two bullets
from a revolver in the back of the head, and he
made a note as to the size and pattern of revolver
which these bullets would fit. Full enquiries
were made by Peters and Kuyper as to the
movements of the surviving traveller, who was
presumably the murderer, and he appeared to
have sailed, the day after his arrival, in a
Chinese junk, which took him up at a point
which was indicated on the chart. Peters had
recorded also the description which the Filipinos
gave of this visitor, and it was plain to me that
there were points in the description which tallied
with the appearance of Vane-Cartwright. It
seemed, though the journal after this point was
fragmentary, that Peters and Kuyper proceeded
immediately afterwards to Manilla, very likely
to communicate their discovery to the officers
of justice. There was nothing more in the
journal itself which it is worth while to repeat
here.</p>

<p>Next I found a considerable number of notes,
which were in large part unintelligible to me
and perhaps to any one except the man who
made them. There were many abbreviations
in them, and very often they were illegible.
They included descriptions of a number of people
with outlandish names, and particulars as to
where and how it was supposed they were to
be found. Unfortunately, it was just in these
particulars that the abbreviations and illegibility
made the difficulties of the reader most serious.
There were also recorded the movements, or
a great part of the movements, of a personage
called “X.” in the months June to September
in the year 1882.</p>

<p>Further, on a separate sheet of paper, I found
an indication of the reason why Peters had
desisted from his pursuit of that person X. whom
I thought myself able to identify. This sheet of
paper was headed “Description given me of the
convict Arkell executed at Singapore in
November, 1882”. The description corresponded
very well with that given in the journal of the
presumable murderer of Longhurst, and so far
as it went it seemed to show that the convict
Arkell might well have been confused with the
successful and respected financier, William
Vane-Cartwright. At the foot of the paper was a
note, with the dates queried, as to the time when
Arkell had been, as he seems to have been, on
the island of Sulu.</p>

<p>There was also among these papers one which
began, “These, so far as I can recollect them,
are the facts told me by MacAndrew in regard
to the agreements made in 1880 between X. and
L.” MacAndrew’s story had apparently related
to changes made in the draft of the
agreement, at the instance of X., which MacAndrew
evidently thought that L. had not understood.
The note seemed to have been finished in haste
and to have left out some important facts, which
Peters no doubt carried in his memory. A
lawyer, among my friends, tells me that without
these facts it is impossible to be certain what
exactly was the trick which “X.” played upon
“L.,” and that it is even possible to suppose
that there was no dishonesty at all in his
proceedings.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch14">

<h2>Chapter XIV</h2>

<p>Towards the end of November, 1896, I again
saw Callaghan. I had some time before
ascertained that he had returned to London, and I
daresay it may appear to the reader strange
that I should not immediately upon his return
have sought him out and again compared notes
with him. But (not to mention that I had no
reason, so far, to set great store upon Callaghan’s
observations and theories) it must be
remembered that I had received a very grave warning
as to his possible character. It is a serious
matter for a father of a family to enter into
intimate relations with a gentleman who, according
to an eminent specialist, is a homicidal lunatic.
So I made first a few enquiries from
acquaintances of his in regard to his character and recent
proceedings. For a while I intended to put off
seeing him till a time, which I was now
unhappily compelled to foresee, when my wife and
children would be safe out of the country. But
in the end my enquiries and my wife’s absolute
conviction satisfied me that the idea of his lunacy
was really, as I had at first supposed, quite
unfounded and foolish.</p>

<p>Anyway, I at last invited Callaghan to stay
for a couple of days in our new home. He
accepted, but for one night only. He arrived in
the afternoon full of his Parisian adventures
and to a less extent of his detective researches.
With these, or with an adorned version of them,
he entertained me for an hour or so before dinner.
It seems that his sudden departure for Paris
was not altogether motiveless. He had, on his
arrival in London, heard by some accident of a
gentleman in Paris who was a correspondent
and intimate of Thalberg. He had
immediately conceived the notion of scraping
acquaintance with this gentleman and using him as a
means of information about Thalberg, and he
was further drawn towards Paris by a fancy
that he would like to study French methods of
criminal investigation, into which, through the
good offices of some friends of his, he thought
he could get some insight. In the latter respect
he was gratified. Now it seems that he had
already begun before Peters’ death to cherish
the ambition of getting high employment in the
Criminal Investigation Department at Scotland
Yard. So it came to pass that his studies in
the science of criminal investigation generally,
occupied more of his attention from that time
till our present meeting than the particular
investigation which had at first fascinated him.
Moreover, before he had been long in Paris he
discovered, to his huge amusement, that he was
himself the subject of suspicion and of close
observation, and without regard to how this might
affect his cherished ambition of an appointment
at Scotland Yard, he entered upon, and
continued during three whole months, an elaborate
scheme of mystification for the French officials
who were observing him, and, through them, for
that very Department in which he wished to fill
a high place. Nevertheless, he had pursued
ingenious enquiries in regard to the (as I still
thought him) unfortunate Thalberg, for which
purpose he paid several flying visits to London
and elsewhere. The result of these enquiries
he related to me, mingling it up with the tale of
his other adventures in such a manner that it
was hard for me to grasp what its importance
might be. I was able to see that Callaghan had
employed quite extraordinary ingenuity and
pains in picking up the facts about Thalberg
which he told me, but that very ingenuity struck
me as ludicrously disproportionate to the
importance of the facts which he had found, or was
ever likely to find along this road. Thalberg was
a solicitor in the City who had been in a small
way of business, till the firm of which he was
now the sole surviving partner began, a good
many years before, to be employed by
Vane-Cartwright. Vane-Cartwright got this firm
appointed solicitors to a company which was formed
to take over his original venture in the East, and
he still continued to employ Thalberg from time
to time upon private business of his own.
Thalberg’s family were interested in Eastern
commerce, and he had correspondence with many
persons in various parts of the far East. Years
before he had transacted for Vane-Cartwright
a good deal of correspondence of a nature so
secret as to be unknown to his clerks, and in
the course of this very year he had again
returned to an employment of the like kind for
some one or other. It appeared that it might
have been upon an errand connected with this
secret correspondence that he had come down
to Long Wilton. Callaghan was much excited
about a discovery which he had made that
Thalberg had in January of this year been in
correspondence with a personage in Madrid,
telegraphing to him in a cipher employed by
the Spanish Consulate in London, of which he
was able to make use through an official in that
Consulate, who had since been discharged for
misconduct and was now in Paris. There was
more of this nature as to the mysterious
proceedings of Thalberg, but I cannot well
remember how much Callaghan told me on that
occasion, and I must observe that I have set
down what he then told me as I understand it
now. I was not able to understand it completely
at the time owing to the fact that throughout
his talk that afternoon Callaghan did not once
allude to Vane-Cartwright by his name.</p>

<p>I wondered then, and I wonder now, how far
up to this time Callaghan suspected
Vane-Cartwright. I believe that he did not like to avow
to himself the full suspicion that he felt, and
that this was why he hesitated to name him to
me. I am sure that in his heart he disliked him
very much; he had always seemed to do so.
But I think that, to my Irish friend,
Vane-Cartwright appeared the embodiment of those
characteristics of the Englishman which an
Irishman knows he dislikes, but thinks that
he ought to respect. So I should guess that,
as long as he could, he had dutifully forced
himself to believe in Vane-Cartwright as a very
estimable person full of English rectitude.
In any case, for all the pains he took to follow
up his suspicion that Thalberg was somehow
connected with the crime, I know that he had
not fully seen the conclusion to which this was
leading him.</p>

<p>When I went up to dress for dinner, I
reminded my wife of certain passages in Peters’
manuscripts on psychology which we had read
together with very great interest. Among these
was a curious paper on “Imagination,
Truth-telling and Lying,” in which, beginning with
the paradox that the correct perception of fact
depended far more on moral qualities, and
truthfulness in ordinary speech far more on
intellectual qualities than was generally supposed,
he proceeded to describe with great wealth of
illustration some of the types under which races
and individual men fall, in respect of their power
of getting hold of truth and of giving it out.
Scattered through these pages were a number of
remarks which came to my mind in this talk with
Callaghan. With most of them I will not trouble
the reader, but in one passage in particular
Peters had pointed out the mistake of thinking
that a man who commits glaring inaccuracies is
necessarily on that account not worth listening
to. Ludicrous inaccuracies, even glaring
falsehoods as they may seem, spring often, he
insisted, from the peculiar abundance and vivacity
of the impressions which a man receives from
what passes before his eyes. A person with
this gift may frequently in his memory put
something that he has truly noticed into a wrong
connexion, or combine two scattered fragments
of observation, true in themselves, into a single
totally erroneous recollection of fact. But a
man who gets things wrong in this way, is, said
Peters, often more full of information than a
more sober observer, because he has noticed far
more, and after all, a very large part of what he
has noticed is sure to be accurately retained. In
another passage, which I am afraid I may mar
by summarising it, Peters described how, with
all men in some degree, but with some men in
a wonderful degree, intellectual faculties are the
servants of emotional interests, so that not only
the power of inference, but even memory itself
will do work at the bidding of pain or pleasure,
liking or dislike, which it will not do upon a
merely rational demand. Reminding my wife
of this, I said I wished I knew by what test I
could tell the true from the false in Callaghan’s
reminiscences, and by what spell I could turn
the flow of those reminiscences into the channel
in which they would be useful.</p>

<p>As we went down to dinner she whispered to
me that, if Callaghan was the sort of man that
I seemed to think, she would try to turn his
thoughts in the useful direction; only I must
let him alone for a little while. In the course of
dinner, she told our guest what she had told me
long before about Vane-Cartwright’s
engagement, and how it had been broken off, and just
what the young lady had said to her. Only of
course she did not go on to tell him the rash
inference which she had drawn as to
Vane-Cartwright’s guilt. I could see that Callaghan
heard her with strange emotion, but my wife
speedily turned the conversation on to more
commonplace topics, upon which, during the
remainder of dinner, he responded to her brightly
enough, but by no means with his usual
appearance of interest.</p>

<p>After dinner Callaghan and I retired to my
study to smoke pipes. He sat for a long while
silent, and I thought that he had gone to sleep,
or should have thought so but for the
contraction of his brows. Suddenly he sat upright in
his chair. “Faith!” he exclaimed with great
energy, and with the air of a man to whom a
really thrilling thought has just occurred, “I
know what became of those eyeglasses of mine.”
“What eyeglasses?” I asked, disappointed and
annoyed at the triviality of what came forth as
the issue of his cogitation. “Why,” he said,
“I once took for a short time to wearing
eyeglasses. I was looking at the stars with a man
one night and I found I could not count seven
Pleiades. So I went to an oculist who said he
would pass me for the Navy, but as I was
paying him a fee I might take a prescription for a
pair of double eyeglasses which I never could
keep steady on my nose.” “Well?” I said
sulkily. “Well,” he answered, “it is only that
I lost them while I was staying with Peters.
Of course they went into that big despatch-box,
which Vane-Cartwright always kept in his room.
My dear Mr. Driver,” he said in a more serious
tone, “do you really suppose that
Vane-Cartwright had not possessed himself of something
handy for throwing suspicion upon you, if you
had turned out to be the convenient man? I
might easily have been the convenient man,
and in that case, the morning after the murder,
my eyeglasses would have been found smashed
and lying on the floor of Peters’ bedroom, as if
he had knocked them off in struggling with me.
Only (fortunately for you and me, Mr. Driver),
Trethewy was chosen as the suitable man, and
accidents that we know of prevented the plot
against Trethewy working as well as perhaps
the plot against you or me might have worked.
Well,” he continued with a smile, “I have a
good deal more to tell you about Mr. Thalberg,
but that will keep for a bit, and we shall
understand it better later. I suspect there is
something different that you wanted to ask me about
now.”</p>

<p>I asked him for anything that he remembered
of that evening when Vane-Cartwright had first
visited Peters at Long Wilton, while Callaghan
was already staying in the house. He
recounted to me and to my wife, whom we called
in, the conversation and events of that evening
in great detail. An indescribable change seemed
to have come over him for a time; not only was
the matter which he had to relate weighty, but
the man himself gave me an impression of force
and character which I had not previously
suspected. I repeat only so much of his narrative
as was of special interest for my purpose.
“After a bit,” said Callaghan, “Peters and
Vane-Cartwright got away on to the subject of
their experiences in some Cannibal Islands, or
French possessions, or I do not know where.
I was not much interested, and I dozed a bit,
till suddenly I was aroused and saw that there
was something up. I do not know what
Vane-Cartwright had said, but suddenly Peters said,
‘Sailed in what?’ three times as quick and
three times as loud as his usual way of
speaking. That was what woke me up. ‘In the’—I
don’t remember the name, I did not quite
catch it, for Vane-Cartwright was speaking
very quietly, though I could see that his face
was set hard and that his eyes were bright,
and I began to think he did not look such a
dull fellow as I thought him at first. Peters
said nothing but ‘Oh,’ and this time very
quietly. Then he got up and strode slowly
about the room with his hands clenched. He
did not seem to notice Vane-Cartwright much,
and Vane-Cartwright went on talking, in as
indifferent a way as he could, about cyclones
and things, the usual sort of travellers’ talk, only
without the lies that I should have thrown in;
but he was watching Peters all the time like a
cat. After a while Peters sat down again and
seemed quite composed, and talked again in
quite a friendly way, but it seemed to be an
effort. Then he went and wrote a letter at the
other end of the room, two letters rather; one
I noticed was addressed to Bombay, or Beirut,
or somewhere beginning with a B. Both the
letters had twopenny-halfpenny stamps on them.
Soon it was bedtime; but Peters was for taking
his letters down to the post that they might
go early in the morning, and Vane-Cartwright
was very anxious to take the letters for him, as
it would be very little out of his way to go down
to the post. Peters thanked him in that very
polite way which he had with him when he did
feel really obstinate. I was not going with them,
for I thought I was in the way, but, just as he
was leaving, Peters turned back and asked me
rather pressingly to come too. I suppose he
would have felt lonely in that man’s company,
for certainly he did not want to talk to me.
I do not think he said more than two words
to me after we parted from Vane-Cartwright,
who, by the way, kept with us all the way to the
post office, which was not on his way home;
but, just as we were getting back, Peters said
to me suddenly, ‘Let me see, did I ask him to
stay with me next time he came here?’ ‘I do
not know,’ said I. ‘Well, good-night,’ said he.”</p>

<p>At this point I broke in upon Callaghan’s
story with loud regrets that Peters had written
those letters with the murderer in the room,
“For you know what those letters were about,”
I added, remembering that he did not. “I
know,” said he, “but he could not help it;
he was an Englishman. You English always
show your hand. Not because you are frank
and outspoken, for you are anything but that,
but because you are so proud. You know,” he
went on, “that I have a devout belief in the
English qualities that all we Irish hear so
much about; but when I had an Englishman
for my dearest friend, I could not help noticing
the national defects, could I? I could not have
acted as Peters did. I rather hope that when
I had got scent of the fellow’s dirty
secret—whatever it was, for I have not a notion about
that—I would have exploded at once and had
it out with him. I daresay I should not, but,
if I had not, at least I should have taken the
trouble to dissemble properly.” “If he had
done either,” I said, “he would be alive to-day,
and Vane-Cartwright would not be a murderer,
or at least——” “I understand you,” said he.</p>

<p>He continued his story, and related with great
detail what was done and said day by day during
Vane-Cartwright’s calamitous sojourn in Peters’
house when he returned to stay there. He
described the relations of the two men as being
exactly the reverse of what they had been when
he had formerly seen them together. Then
Peters had been genial and friendly,
Vane-Cartwright stiff and unforthcoming. Now it was
very much the other way. Several times, it
appeared, the conversation had got upon the
subject of Peters’ Eastern travels. Each time
the conversation had been led thither by
Vane-Cartwright in a way of which I was
afterwards to have experience. Peters was in a
manner compelled to enter into it and
compelled to yield information which Callaghan at
the moment had thought utterly trivial, but
which he now saw clearly Vane-Cartwright was
anxious to possess. The information which was
extracted seems to have related to all the places
that Peters had visited in the East, and all the
people whom he had ever met, and Callaghan
remembered, or fancied, that several times, while
he was being thus drawn out, Peters showed
curious irritation. It appeared most strikingly
from Callaghan’s recital that Vane-Cartwright
had throughout shown the coolest readiness to
talk about the scene of his crime, if he had
committed one, and to take Peters’ recollection
back to the old days of his association with
Longhurst.</p>

<p>But now I must explain that through all
that Callaghan told me, ran the same strain of
odd and fantastic inaccuracy to which I have
more than once alluded. Several times, for
example, he said that I was present at
conversations at which I certainly was not present.
He repeated to me remarks of my own, which,
if I ever said anything like them, were made
on a totally different occasion from that of
which he spoke. One of those remarks had
really been made within three hours of the time
when he repeated it to me, and could not have
been made previously. This is perhaps the
best example that I can give of what caused
me a most exasperating sense of
disappointment. Disappointment because, where I could
not check him, Callaghan seemed to be
supplying me, in the greatest fulness and in the
most credible manner, with just the information
that I desired; but where I could check him,
though he was now and then curiously accurate
in his recollection of circumstances well known
to me, which I had not thought he could have
observed, it still more often happened that he
was under some grotesque mistake.</p>

<p>Worst of all, he gave me new details about
the fatal night, which, if they could have been
trusted, would have had greater weight than
any other piece of evidence that had yet come
to me, but they were just of the sort in which
he was likely to be mistaken. Speaking of the
moment at which he was called out from his
room by the disturbance in the street, he
declared that knocking immediately at
Vane-Cartwright’s door he heard, as Vane-Cartwright
answered from the far corner of the room, a click
which he was certain came from the lock of the
despatch-box which he had mentioned. He
conjectured that among various articles which
were there for a dark purpose, the knife which
was the instrument of Peters’ death lay in that
box, and that he had interrupted
Vane-Cartwright in the act of taking it forth. This of
course was mere conjecture, but what followed
seemed at first evidence enough to have hanged
the criminal. He had opened Vane-Cartwright’s
door, and he now described to me almost every
object that was in the room as he entered it.
Amongst others there lay upon the chest of
drawers George Borrow’s <i>Bible in Spain</i> in a
binding which he described. Curiously enough
he did not know the significance of this; he had,
as he told me, been so much overwhelmed with
grief when the murder was discovered that he
had hardly begun to see or think distinctly till
after we had all left the room of death; but as
the reader may remember, this was the very
book (and it was bound in the same way) which
was found in that room dropped from the dead
man’s hand with torn and crumpled leaves.
Who but Vane-Cartwright could have brought
it there?</p>

<p>It was one of Peters’ oddities, well known to
me (and perhaps Vane-Cartwright had learnt
it long ago at Saigon), that he would have
welcomed at any strange hour the incursion of
a friend to talk about anything. No doubt, I
thought, Vane-Cartwright entered his room on
the pretext of showing him a passage which bore
on something he had said. Probably between
the leaves of the <i>Bible in Spain</i> he carried
something that looked like a paper-knife. Anyway
here was proof that after the hour at which any
of us saw Peters alive, after Vane-Cartwright,
by his own account, had last seen him, that man
entered Peters’ room. “But,” I exclaimed, as
all this ran through my mind, “you spoke just
now of the day when I was riding at Long
Wilton, whereas I was on a horse to-day for
the first time for four years. Ten times at
least I have known you put things out of time
or out of place just like that, by way of giving
colour to your story. How do I know that
you have not done so now, that you did not
really see that book in Vane-Cartwright’s room
any one of the other times that you went there,
that it had not been back in Peters’ library and
been brought up again by Peters himself?”</p>

<p>To my surprise Callaghan answered most
humbly. He was quite aware, he said, of this
evil trick of his mind; he had had it from a boy,
and his parents ought to have flogged it out of
him. As to the particular point on which I
challenged him, he could not himself be quite
sure.</p>

<p>During the remainder of his stay with me I
gave him an outline of what I had so far
discovered, and we compared notes upon it, but
he was not long with me, as he had an
important engagement next evening, and our
conference was not so full as it should have
been. So it easily happened that neither of us
gained the enlightenment which he might have
gained if our talk had been fuller. But I must
confess that I fell into the fault which he called
English. My disclosure was more incomplete
than it need have been; I had not quite got
over my instinctive wish to keep him at arm’s
length, and my pride rebelled a little at the
discovery that this erratic Irishman was not a
man whom I could afford to patronise.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch15">

<h2>Chapter XV</h2>

<p>The chapter which I am about to write may
well prove dreary. It will be nothing but a
record of two deaths and of much
discouragement. Here was I with my theory (for it had
been no more) grown into a fairly connected
history which so appealed at many points to a
rational judgment as to leave little room for
doubt of its truth. And yet, as I could not
but see, there was very little in it at present
which could form even a part of the evidence
necessary to convict Vane-Cartwright in a
Court of Law. I determined all the same to
get advice upon the matter from a lawyer, who
was my friend, thinking that it was now time
to put my materials in the hands of the
authorities charged with the detection of crime, and
that, with this to start upon, and with the skill
and resources which they possessed, they could
hardly fail before long to discover the evidence
needed for a prosecution. But my lawyer friend,
though he quite agreed with me in my
conviction that Vane-Cartwright was guilty of two
murders, doubted whether the facts which I had
got together would move the authorities to take
up the matter actively. Still he undertook,
with my approval, to talk about the subject
with some one in the Public Prosecutor’s
office or in the Criminal Investigation
Department of Scotland Yard, I do not know which.
Nothing resulted from this, and the failure
needs little explanation. Some want of touch
between town and country police, some want
of eagerness on the part of a skilled official
who had lately incurred blame and
disappointment through the ludicrous failure of a keen
pursuit upon a somewhat similar trail, these
might account for it all. But besides, Callaghan
had been beforehand with us, and on this
occasion had managed to raise a spirit of incredulity
about it all. Perhaps too even hardened experts
recoiled instinctively from associating with guilt
one of the few great men of finance who were
at once well known to the outside public and
respected in the City itself.</p>

<p>For me then there was nothing but to wait
for the further things which I somehow felt
certain would turn up. As for Callaghan it
happened just about this time that he became
keenly enamoured of an invention, made by an
engineer friend of his, through which he
persuaded himself that he could make his own and
his friend’s fortune. Henceforward for some
time the affair of Peters seems to have passed
from his mind, and he was prevented from
meeting me at the few times at which I should
have been able to see him.</p>

<p>In the course of December I had a letter
from my old parish from a friend who was kind
enough to keep me posted in the gossip of the
place. He said that the police were now busy
over a new clue as to the murder. It may be
remembered that according to Trethewy he had,
as he returned home on the night of the murder,
been passed in the lane by a man riding a horse
and leading another. Well, report said now
that a man in a neighbouring parish, who had
been greatly excited about the murder at the
time, had been having dreams about it night
after night, which impressed him with the notion
that he was to discover the truth. Rooting
about for all the recollections of that time which
he could find among his neighbours, he heard
that in the early morning after the murder a
man with two horses had been seen between
Peters’ house and the village, that another
man, a stranger to the village, had come up
from the direction of Peters’ house and had
mounted the second horse, and that the two
had ridden off together. Report added that the
man whom Trethewy had seen had now been
traced by the police, and that his answers as to
the man who had joined him and ridden off with
him were unsatisfactory and suspicious; and it
added one more telling detail. The police (as
I may have mentioned) had before I left Long
Wilton noticed one window at the back of the
house as in some respects the readiest way by
which the house could have been wrongfully
entered. It belonged to a housemaid’s closet, of
which the door did not shut properly. It was
very easy to climb up to it; but then the window
itself was very small, and it was a question
whether a man of ordinary stature could possibly
have squeezed himself through it; now the
strange man of this rumour was described as
being ridiculously small and thin. There were
many more picturesque details related, but the
whole story professed only to consist of unsifted
rumour. I believed little of it, but I naturally
did accept the statement (quite mistaken) that
the police were busy in the matter. With my
fixed idea about Vane-Cartwright, I felt sure
that they were upon a false scent. But I
thought it very likely that this would for the
present absorb their attention, and, between
this and the great pressure of work in a new
parish and of certain family anxieties, I made
no further effort at this time to secure attention
to the discovery which I believed I had made.</p>

<p>Twice in the few days just before Christmas
my hopes of making further discoveries were
vainly aroused. I made a call of civility in my
new parish upon a notable Nonconformist
parishioner, and, in my rapid survey of his
sitting-room before he came to me, I noticed several
indications that he had been in Australia, and
I saw on the mantelpiece a framed photograph.
It was rather a hazy and faded photograph
which gave me no clear impression of its
subject, but under it was written, “Walter
Longhurst, Melbourne, 3rd April, 1875”. Could
that be my Longhurst, and was this one of those
relations of his, whom, as I had heard,
Vane-Cartwright had treated with suspicious
generosity? Might he not, in that case, be the
possessor of information more valuable than he
knew? He now came in. He was a truly
venerable man, who in spite of great age was
still active as a lay-preacher of one of the
Methodist Churches, and I was attracted by
the archaic but evidently sincere piety of his
greeting when he entered the room. But
unfortunately, when by adjusting his gold spectacles
he had discovered of what profession I was, a
cloud of suspicion seemed to arise in his mind,
and he was more anxious to testify, in all charity
but with all plain dealing, concerning priestly
pretensions and concerning that educational
policy which was then beginning to gather
strength, than to enter into any such
conversation as I desired. I made out, nevertheless,
that this Walter Longhurst was probably my
Longhurst, and my expectation rose
unreasonably. My new friend (if he will let me call him
so) was no relation of his, but had known him
at a time when both were in Australia.
Longhurst was from his point of view outside the
fold besides being a rough kind of man, or, as
he put it, a “careless liver”; but he evidently
flattered himself that he had exercised a good
influence over Longhurst, and the latter had
given money, which he could then ill afford,
though he made a good deal of money later, to
help religious work with which my lay-preaching
friend was connected. Later on, when my
informant had returned to England and was for
some time incapacitated by an accident which
happened on the voyage, Longhurst, to his
surprise, had from time to time sent him presents
of money. They came in the form of
banknotes, sent by a mysterious agent in London,
who gave no address to which they could be
returned, but who wrote stating Longhurst’s
desire that he should use them for himself, or,
if he absolutely would not, should at least use
them in his work. All this the old man’s
gratitude obliged him to relate, but, when I
pressed him for information about Longhurst’s
relations or friends, either he knew nothing or
his ill-defined suspicion of me returned and shut
his mouth. I did, however, ascertain that some
years before (after Longhurst’s death) a rich
gentleman, whose name the old man had
forgotten, though I thought I could supply it, had
heard of him in some way as one of Longhurst’s
beneficiaries, and pressed upon him a pension
which he had refused, as he would, if he could,
have refused Longhurst’s bounty.</p>

<p>Two days later, on Christmas Eve, I was
urgently summoned to visit Peters’ aunt, Miss
Waterston, whom I had seen at his funeral. I
had called upon her in the summer at her flat in
London, but a lady who was staying with her
remained in the room all the time, in spite, as I
thought, of several hints that she might go, and
Miss Waterston, when I left, said how glad she
would be to see me again, and, she hoped, talk
with me more fully. I took little note of this at
the time, but I made up my mind to take my
wife to see the old lady when I could, and
continued thinking of it and putting it off till
I got this summons, which told me that Miss
Waterston was very ill and had something
which she much wished to tell me. When I
arrived at her flat she was dead. The lady
who had been looking after her told me that
she had several times shown anxiety that I
should come soon, but had at last remarked
that if I did not come in time she would accept
it as a sign that what she had meant to tell me
was best untold. She had two weeks before,
when she was not yet ill, remarked that she
would like to see me soon. Various straws of
things that were told me about her suggested
that she had lately become concerned afresh
about her nephew’s death. She had been
intimate with the Cartwright family, and had
to the end seen something of a rather neglected
widowed cousin of William Vane-Cartwright’s.
Of course I have no ground for thinking that
she had any grave disclosure to make to me.</p>

<p>Christmas, that year, came sadly to me. We
must in any case have been full of memories
of the last Christmas, at which Peters had
joined our party and added much to the
children’s and our own delight. This Christmas
he was dead; the hope, not perhaps consonant
with Christmas thoughts, of avenging him had
arisen in my mind and was dying, and I came
home from the deathbed of the last remaining
person of his kin who had loved him better
than we did, and who in the little I had seen
of her had reflected to me some indefinable
trace of the same noble qualities as I discovered
in him.</p>

<p>I attended her funeral. So did the old
cousin who had come with her to Peters’
funeral. He recognised me and greeted me
courteously, remarking what a charming person
that Mr. Vane-Cartwright was whom he had
met at my house. He looked to me older;
his grey hair was turning auburn; he was as
unattractive to me as the rest of the appanage
of funerals, but I was grateful to him for being
one of the very few who came to honour the
remains of the old woman, almost a stranger
to me, whom I yet so truly respected.</p>

<p>By the time the anniversary of Peters’ death
came round I was again alone; it had been
necessary after Christmas that my daughter
should go South, and my wife had taken her.
I was busy and therefore happy enough, and
I did not often but I did sometimes ask myself,
would nothing more ever turn up? Yes, before
long something did turn up; something not to
help me on but to show me that, in thinking ever
to unravel the dark history of Longhurst’s fate,
I had started upon a hopeless task. Early in
February a letter came to me re-directed to
Peters from the dead letter office at Siena,
where it had long lain entombed. It was a
letter written by Peters to a certain Reverend
James Verschoyle, D.D., addressing him as a
person Peters well knew and had seen quite
lately. It bore the date of Vane-Cartwright’s
first evening at Grenvile Combe. It reminded
him of a conversation which he had had with
Peters, at their last meeting, about a very
mysterious event in the Philippines, and of the great
surprise which Peters had expressed at what
Verschoyle then told him. “To tell the truth,”
said Peters, “it should have revived a suspicion
which I had long ago entertained against a man
who was once my friend. Or rather, it should
have done more than that, it should have
convinced me of his guilt and given me the means
of proving it. How I came to put it from my
mind I hardly know. I think that my
recollection of what you told me is precise, but I should
be greatly obliged if you would refer to your
journals of the months May to October, 1882,
and perhaps you will oblige me by copying
out for me all that has any bearing on this
matter. I am sorry to trouble you, but I
am convinced that the ends of justice may
be served by your doing this for me, and I
suspect that if they are to be served, I must
act as quickly as I may.”</p>

<p>I lost no time in tracing the Rev. James
Verschoyle, D.D., who had about a year before
been at Siena. He had, after a sojourn in
Germany, come back to England. He had, I found,
been a missionary in the East. I managed to
trace him to his latest address, only to find that
he had died in the previous August. I had an
interview with some of his family, and found them
most obligingly willing to search for the
journals in question. It was strange that the journals
for the years 1881 to 1883 could nowhere be
found. I was convinced that they had contained
those crucial facts to which Peters had referred
in his letter to Bryanston.</p>

<p>Evidently there had been information in Dr.
Verschoyle’s possession which in Peters’ hands
could have led to the conviction of
Vane-Cartwright. Evidently Peters had once seen that
information, but had disregarded it, more or less
wilfully, in his determination to think his old
acquaintance innocent, and to put the guilt on
Arkell who had been hanged at Singapore.
Evidently the full significance of Verschoyle’s
facts came to his mind when Vane-Cartwright,
that evening at Grenvile Combe, had revived
his first suspicion, and he wrote at once to
recover the precise details. But of what nature
that information was, and how Vane-Cartwright,
seeing Verschoyle’s name on an envelope, could
have grasped the full extent of the danger to
himself, I could not guess then, and I cannot
guess now.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch16">

<h2>Chapter XVI</h2>

<p>So then the mystery of Longhurst’s fate was
not for me to unravel. Peters had held the
clue of it, and had died because he held it;
Verschoyle perhaps had the clue and was dead
too, probably from some other cause; neither
had recorded his secret, or the record could not
be found. As for the manner of Peters’ death,
what further place was there to look to for some
fresh discovery? I already had heard all that
any of my old parishioners, any grown man
or woman among them, knew, and it was less
than I knew, and I had searched the
neighbourhood for news, quietly, but I hoped no less
effectively; the police, I was now ready to
believe, had searched as zealously and more wisely.
And so Vane-Cartwright was to go unhanged,
and why not, after all? he was not a homicidal
maniac but a wise criminal, rather more unlikely
than most men to commit any further crime.
Even his gains, however ill-gotten, were not
likely to be more harmfully spent than those
of many a better man. And no innocent man
suffered under suspicion. Trethewy had been
found a good place by some unlooked-for
benefactor, where no memory of the crime would
pursue him. Callaghan’s numerous enough
friends understood him far too well to suspect
him, and as for his numerous acquaintances who
were not friends, if they did suspect him, the
good man would be rather amused than
otherwise. Let Vane-Cartwright live and adorn
society which is adorned by men and women
worse than he, to whom circumstances have
never brought the opportunity of dramatic
wrong-doing.</p>

<p>Thus I tried to think, as I left England for
a few weeks in the late spring of 1897 to join
my wife and our daughter, who was now much
stronger, in Italy; but, whatever I tried to
think, I had always with me that consciousness
of a purpose frustrated or let go, which is
perhaps the hardest thing to bear well and the
most enervating thing to bear ill.</p>

<p>Some ten days later I was in Florence with
my wife. The next day we were to go to
Rome, leaving our daughter at the villa of a
friend in Fiesole. I remember at our early
breakfast telling my wife the facts or reports
which I had been picking up about that strangely
powerful secret organisation, the Mafia. I
repeated to her what I had just heard, that not
only prominent Italian politicians, but even
foreigners who had large commercial dealings
with Italy, sometimes found it convenient to be
on good terms with that society. But she was
little interested in political facts which did not
connect themselves with any particular
personality, and I thought she had hardly heard me,
though she raised her eyes to listen from the
volume of Senator Villari’s <i>Savonarola</i> which
she was finishing. I little imagined that before
another day had closed this chance remark of
mine would have acquired the closest personal
interest for her, and have been turned to very
practical account.</p>

<p>Later in the day she was in the Pitti Galleries,
and I came there from Cook’s office to join her.
She was looking with puzzled interest at a
picture by Botticelli, when a tall man, dressed
like an Englishman, placed himself with assumed
unconsciousness just in front of her, in a position
of vantage for fixing his connoisseur’s gaze upon
it. She turned away and met me, and was
saying, half-amused, that after all there were
Englishmen who could be as rude as any foreigner,
when, looking at him again as he moved away
to leave the gallery, she started and said: “Oh,
Robert, I know his face”. I too knew his face,
and knew, as she did not, his name. “It is that
dreadful man that I told you about who was at
Crema. Do not you remember I told you how
he would keep the only good room at the hotel
when I arrived there with mother so terribly
ill, the time she had that first stroke. And oh,
I took such pains to write him the nicest note
I could”—and very nice her notes could
be—“and I could just see his horrid face as he
glanced at it and said nothing but ‘tell the lady
I cannot’ to the waiter. And oh, poor mother
did suffer in the dreadful hot room with all the
kitchen noises and the smells.” I did remember
her story well, an ordinary story enough, of one
of those neglects of courtesy which, once in
fifty times it may be, are neglects of elementary
mercy; but I said little, and I did not tell her
that her rediscovered enemy was my enemy
already, William Vane-Cartwright. I said to
myself that I would not tell her because she
would feel an unreasonable relenting towards
Vane-Cartwright, if once she realised that she
herself owed him a grudge. Really I did not
tell her because I had promptly formed a design
which she would have discovered and
disapproved.</p>

<p>That evening I left my wife on some pretext,
and having discovered Vane-Cartwright’s hotel,
I paid him a friendly call. I suppose it was
dishonourable; at least, I have often reproached
myself for it, but truly I do not know if it was
really dishonourable. I do know that I was
very foolish to dream, as I did, that I should
ferret something out of him. He received me
in his private sitting-room with cordiality, or,
I should rather say, effusiveness. He sent a
rather urgent message to his friend who was
travelling with him, as if (I thought) he did not
wish to be alone with me, but he was far from
embarrassed. “Tell me, Mr. Driver,” he began,
as soon as we were seated, “has anything
further been heard about the murder of our
friend Peters?” I answered that Trethewy
had been released and had left the neighbourhood,
having found a situation, through some
friends unknown to me, and that to the best of
my belief, the police had discovered no further
clue. “I am glad about Trethewy,” he said.
“You know I always suspected there had been
some mistake there, and besides, I always liked
the man. I do not think the police will discover
a clue,” he said, “I rather think that the
solution of the mystery will occur to some of us, his
friends, if a solution ever is found.” I was
silent. I could not tell whether he had a design
to allay possible suspicions of mine, or a design
to goad me into betraying whether I had those
suspicions, or whether he was merely keeping
himself in practice. I wanted to drop the
subject if I could. “Do you know,” he persisted,
“whether they have found any other way in
which the house could be entered from outside
except the window of his room, by which I
don’t believe the murderer did enter?” I said
there was a small window to a housemaid’s
closet which was not fastened, and that the
housemaid could not be quite certain that the
door of the closet was really locked overnight,
for it did not shut properly; but it was very
doubtful whether a man could get through the
window. “Who in the world,” he said, “could
have a motive for killing Peters, dear old Eustace
Peters?” I was beginning to lose my head,
for I felt I was playing an unworthy part.
“Well,” I said, with no particular purpose, “it
seems certain that it cannot have been Mr.
Thalberg.” “Certain, I should say,” he
answered. “Oh, no,” he added, more
energetically, “I know Thalberg well, and he is not the
man. As for Callaghan, one might as well
suspect you or me—me, I should say,” and he
turned away to fetch a cigar, or perhaps to
watch me for a moment in the mirror. “The
fact is,” he said returning, “it must be far easier
than we, who have never had occasion to give
our wits to it, think to commit a murder and
hide one’s tracks absolutely. But here is Mr.
Poile, let me introduce you, and let us, for
Heaven’s sake, talk of a more cheerful subject.”
So we did turn to a subject which I should have
thought had no pitfalls, the subject of Italian
brocades, of which Vane-Cartwright was an
amateur. He produced a large parcel of ancient
and gorgeous stuffs which had come up on
approval from a shop. He talked, in a way
that really held all my interest for the time,
about the patterns; and, starting from the more
conventional of the designs before us, he
proceeded to discuss the history of common patterns,
telling me curious things about the patterns and
the fabrics of the Eastern Archipelago and the
Malay Peninsula. Suddenly he picked up a
really noble piece of brocade, and turning to me,
with a face of winning simplicity and kindliness
which he could not have learnt to assume if it
had not at some time been natural, he said:
“Oh, Mr. Driver, I am so fond of picking up
these things, and it is so hard to find any
satisfactory use for them, it would be a real kindness
if you would accept this as an altar-cloth for
your church. It will be wasted in a museum
otherwise.” It was too much for me. The
proposition that I should accept an altar-cloth
for my church from the man that I was seeking
to convict of murder, sent a visible shudder
through my frame, and all the more because I
felt that it was illogical to recoil from this when I
had not recoiled from affecting friendship to him.
I said “No” quite violently, and, when I collected
my wits to utter thanks and explanations, they
were at once too effusive and too lame to have
blinded a stupider man than Vane-Cartwright.</p>

<p>I stayed long with him—should have
outstayed my welcome, if I had ever been
welcome—for I was demoralised, and had resolved in
mere dull obstinacy both to disarm his suspicions
somehow and to get something out of him.
The first would have been impossible for any
one, the second was impossible for me then, and
at last I took leave, praying him not to come
down with me, and descended the stairs a very
miserable man. I had behaved stupidly, that
was certain. I had behaved badly, that was
possible. I had shown him that I suspected him,
that was certain. I ought to have known
beforehand that he would guess it, for my refusal to
visit him in London (as I happened to have
promised I would, before he left Long Wilton)
had been marked enough to set him thinking.
Had I done nothing worse than betray vague
suspicions? Yes, in my floundering efforts I
had recurred to his Eastern patterns, and so
led him to Eastern travels and towards topics
dangerous to him, only to fall into my own trap.
He must have seen that I had somehow heard
before, as not one Englishman in twenty
thousand has heard, of the little island of Sulu.</p>

<p>Wholly sick with myself I stood in the hall
of the hotel, absently watching the porter set
out the newly arrived letters in little heaps on
a table. There was one for Vane-Cartwright.
Had I not noticed that handwriting before?
Yes, it was a marked hand, one so obviously
that of a servant and yet so well-formed and
with such an elegance. I gazed at the
handwriting (somehow I thought of Sunday schools).
I had just time to note the postmark before
another letter covered it.</p>

<p>The corner of my eye had half-caught a
vision of some one coming downstairs, coming
very quietly but very quickly. A light step
on the rug beside me, an unpleasantly gentle
hand taking my arm, the fingers, I half-fancied,
seeming to take measure of the size and
hardness of my muscle, and Vane-Cartwright’s too
cultivated voice saying lightly, “Looking to
see if there is any one else that you know
coming to the hotel, Mr. Driver? I always do
that. Well, good-night again, and so many
thanks.” “Caught again,” I reflected, as I
turned into the street, and nothing gained by
spying and being caught spying. Yes,
something gained, that letter for Vane-Cartwright
with the postmark Crondall is in the
handwriting of Mrs. Trethewy.</p>

<hr/>

<p>One question alone occupied me as I walked
back: What was the exact significance of the
almost certain fact that the situation which the
Trethewys had obtained was really in
Vane-Cartwright’s service? Had I learnt that fact
a day sooner, I might have thought that,
murderer or not, he had done a true and
unobtrusive kindness in secretly engaging them,
but the little scene in the Pitti, and the trivial
story of the best bedroom at Crema, shut
that explanation out of my mind. I had
not resolved this question when I got to the
hotel and to my wife, who was now anxiously
expecting me. I had not even thought of the
other questions, to which it led, but I had at
least returned in far too sensible a mood to
think any further of disguising anything from
her. Our talk lasted well into the night. I
record so much of the substance of its close
as really concerns my story. “But still I do
not see,” I said, “why you should say I have
spoilt our holiday.” “Because you must go
by the first train to-morrow. Not a moment
later. Oh, Robert, cannot you see why I have
been so angry? I have looked forward so
to our stay alone together at Rome, and at
another time I should be very angry to lose
it; but it is not that. Oh, Robert, I could find
it in my heart to beg you not to do your duty.
It is your duty; you would not be so full of
passion against the man if it was not that you
knew it was your duty; and I know it too, and
you must follow up that clue at once before he
makes it too late. But, oh, what am I saying,
it is not your duty I am thinking of. I would
beg you to let the duty be if that would save
you. But it is too late now; it’s a race for life
between you and him. Peters has been killed,
and Verschoyle has been killed, and oh!”</p>

<p>The thought was not in the least new to me
except so far as it concerned Verschoyle. I had
foreseen a time when my life would be in danger
from Vane-Cartwright. Stupid as it may seem,
I had not realised yet that that time was now,
and anyway I had resolved to treat it lightly
myself, and hoped that it might not occur to
her. We spent a while without words. Then
I said, in the foolish persuasion that it was a
manly utterance: “I do not think that I am
brave, but somehow the idea of being murdered,
even if I put the likelihood of it far higher than
I do, is not one which, apart from the thought
of you, would weigh much with me”. Whatever
I may have been going to add, I was allowed
to go no further. I was made to see in a
minute that the risk to my life was a real
consideration which it was selfish and, in a
man of normal courage, very cheap to
overlook; but anyway, the need for haste was
real, and, after a very short rest, I was to
start. To get ahead of Vane-Cartwright, who
would probably look out for my departure, I
had resolved to take horses and carriage in
the early morning, post to Prato, and take the
railway there. My wife was to go with our
daughter to our friend’s villa. So the next
morning found me on my way to England,
sad to go, and yet, I must confess, not a little
exhilarated, against all reason, by the sense
that perhaps it really was a race for life on
which I had started, and a race with a
formidable competitor.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch17">

<h2>Chapter XVII</h2>

<p>Crondall is a small market town on a chalk
stream in a Southern county, and about two
miles from it down the valley lies the shooting-
and fishing-box which Vane-Cartwright, as I
found, had lately taken, with a very
considerable shooting in the well-wooded hills, which
lay behind it reaching up to the chalk downs,
and with a mile or so of fishing in the
trout-stream which passed through the garden.
People shoot because it is the thing to do,
but as a rule they do not hunt or fish unless
they like it. So it was for the shooting that
Vane-Cartwright had taken this place, a very
charming place for a bachelor, and within easy
reach of town. Trethewy, however, had been
engaged as a sort of water-bailiff and to look after
the fishing, which he was more or less
competent to do. I found him installed in a queer
old thatched cottage which stood on an island,
formed by two branches of the stream, at the
lower end of the garden. The cottage could
be approached by a narrow footbridge from
a private footpath which led from Crondall.
On the other side of the stream a public
footpath led towards the small village and the
once famous fishing inn, at which I took up
my quarters for a few nights. The bridge
just mentioned was formed by two narrow
brick arches, and above them were hatches
which were now raised; and just below the
bridge the stream was spanned by one of the
old-fashioned fish-houses which are
occasionally found on South-country streams, under the
floor of which were large eel traps in which
eels migrating down stream were caught.
Under the fish-house, which was entered from
Trethewy’s cottage, the stream rushed in two
pent-up channels which joined again in a
broad, reed-fringed pool, with a deep dark
hole immediately below the fish-house. My
eye fastened on this pool at once as the best
morning bath which had been offered me for
some years.</p>

<p>Why was Trethewy there? Was Trethewy
after all an accomplice in the crime? My wife
and I were agreed in not inclining to that
explanation, though in some ways it looked the
most plausible. It followed that one or more
of the family was, to the knowledge of
Vane-Cartwright, in possession of information which,
if it came out, would establish Vane-Cartwright’s
guilt. It did not follow that any of them had
guilty knowledge; probably they were not
aware of the significance of what they knew.
Which of them held this dark secret, and
how was I to elicit it?</p>

<p>In the call just after their tea-time, which I
lost no time in paying, I found that each of
the family was for a different reason hard to
approach on the topic on which I was so
impatient to enter. I was welcomed respectfully
and cordially enough, but they were evidently
puzzled and surprised at my visit. I tried
Trethewy first. He struck me as much
improved by his season of adversity, by the more
active life he now led, or by the rigid abstinence
to which, as I soon gathered, he had brought
himself; but he told me quite firmly he never
spoke, never wished to speak of the question
of Peters’ death. He had himself suffered the
horror of being accused when he was innocent;
he wished to run no risk of bringing the same
on some other possibly innocent man. Besides,
the guilt of his own thought and motives still
weighed on him, and he had no wish to judge
any other. Nevertheless, he said plainly, when
I asked how he liked his new position, that he
was ill at ease to have come and hoped soon
to get away. From his impenetrable manner,
I began to fancy that, contrary to what I had
at first thought, the secret rested with him, and
in that case the secret would be very difficult to
extract. As for Mrs. Trethewy, from the time
of the murder two thoughts had mainly occupied
her mind: anxiety for her husband, and anxiety
that her daughter, for whose upbringing she
was so careful, should know nothing of the
suspicion that had rested on her father, and
hear as little as possible of the horror that
had occurred so near her. The girl had been
bundled away, the very day after the discovery,
to stay with Mrs. Trethewy’s mother, who lived
thirty miles away from their home. And to
this day, the mother told me, the girl had no
idea that her father had been in prison charged
with the crime. Accordingly, Mrs. Trethewy
was overflowing with gratitude to
Vane-Cartwright, who had found them this new home
far away. She told me that he had always
seemed to take a fancy to her husband, and had
visited their cottage several times during his
stay with Peters; and that it was after a talk
with him that she sent the girl away to her
grandmother’s. That the suggestion had
actually come from him she did not say, it was a
mere guess of mine that he had contrived to
put it into her head. With the girl, whom
she sent on an errand to Crondall, I got no
opportunity of talk that night, and I had to
return to my inn ill-satisfied with my
exploration so far, and puzzled how to proceed.</p>

<p>I got my bathe next morning in the pool of
which I have spoken (this is not quite so
unimportant as it may seem). Trethewy managed
to ensure me privacy for the purpose, and after
that I called on the Trethewy family again. I
have remarked already that I supposed myself
to have heard all that any grown-up person in
my old parish could tell in regard to the murder
and its surrounding circumstances. It had been
borne on my mind strongly since my meeting
with Vane-Cartwright at Florence, that others
besides adults have eyes and memories, that
Trethewy’s girl had been near the house at the
time of the murder and on the following day,
and that I could not count on having heard
from her parents all that she might have to say
that might be interesting to me. When I called
on the Trethewys again, I found it an easy
matter to get a walk by the river-side alone
with the girl. I had anticipated that, if I were to
pay any decent regard to her mother’s hitherto
successful wishes for her ignorance, I might
have to talk long and roundabout before I could
elicit what I wanted. I soon found that it was
not so. Ellen Trethewy, though little taller
than before, had mentally grown in those fifteen
months from a shy and uninteresting
schoolgirl to a shy but alert, quick-witted and, as it
now struck me, rather interesting young woman.</p>

<p>We had many things belonging to old times
to talk over, but I found her anxious herself to
talk on the very subject on which I was bent,
and I found in a moment that her mother’s
precautions had been absolutely vain. Knowing
her mother’s wish, she had never alluded to
the matter since; but her grandmother, who
disliked Trethewy, had taken a keen pleasure
in acquainting her with all that she herself
knew (and a good deal more besides) about the
course of the proceedings against him. The
girl, not quite trusting her grandmother, had
procured and carefully read the newspaper
account of the trial before the magistrates. She
had never doubted for one instant, she told
me, that her father was innocent, and it was
with more than common understanding that
she studied the details in the story which might
make his innocence clear. “Is it very wicked
of me, Mr. Driver?” she said, “that I do not
feel a bit, not a bit grateful to Mr. Vane-Cartwright,
and I do not believe father does. I do
believe he would have gone to the workhouse
rather, if he had known it when we came here
that he was to be under Mr. Vane-Cartwright.
But he thought the gentleman who sent for us,
and who was really his agent, was the master
of the place; and, once we were here, mother
begged him so not to go. Mother is always
saying how good Mr. Cartwright has been to us,
and father never answers a word; but I am sure
he has a plan to take us away somewhere far
off.” “Tell me,” I said, “what makes you say
all this. Have you seen anything in Mr.
Vane-Cartwright to make you think he had some wrong
reason for getting your father to come here?”
“Oh, I do not say that,” she said, “but I have
always feared his looks. Always, I think, since
he first came to our house to talk to father, and
much more since I saw him at the window that
dreadful morning when poor Mr. Peters lay
dead.” “Why, what could you see that
morning?” I said. “Oh, very little,” she said. “You
see, of course we heard the news as Edith passed
by on her way to call the police, and mother told
me to keep within doors, and she kept in
herself, and then she went to father and woke him,
and she stayed there talking to him, and I was
alone and I felt so frightened. And then the
policeman came, and you, sir, and the doctor;
and by-and-by some neighbours came looking
in. One of them was Mrs. Trimmer who kept
the baker’s shop, and I was fond of her, and I
do not know whether it was that I was frightened
to be alone, or just inquisitiveness, for I was a
child then, though it is not so long ago, but,
though I never disobeyed mother before, I did
so that time; and I went out, and Mrs. Trimmer
took my hand and we walked up and looked at
the house. It was not much we saw, for all we
stood so long staring; but the front door opened
and we saw that Irish gentleman look out,
looking so sad, poor man, and then he took a turn or
two up and down in the hall, leaving the door
open; and then we could hear voices, and the
rest of you came downstairs and into the hall,
but I could see Mr. Vane-Cartwright come to
the window of Mr. Peters’ room, and he stood
there looking out of the window with his hand
leaning on the sash of the window, leaning
forward, seeming to be looking out intently at the
people below.” “Did he open the latch of the
window?” I asked at once. “I couldn’t say
that,” said she. “Why were you so frightened?”
I asked. “Oh, I do not know,” said she; “he
didn’t look anything very terrible, and I couldn’t
see him well for there was frost on the window,
but I knew him by his black moustache.”</p>

<p>I suppose every one of my readers has been
guilty of mislaying some little article of
importance and looking for it everywhere but in the
right place, which always turns out to have been
the most obvious place of all. Perhaps I may
be forgiven for having all these fifteen months
been doing something analogous. I had not
only overlooked Trethewy’s daughter; I knew
when I spoke to Sergeant Speke about those
tracks in the snow that there was something
more I had meant to ask him and had forgotten;
and often since I had been dimly conscious of
something forgotten. That something was the
window-latch. The girl could not tell me about
it, but at least it might be possible to prove by
others, who had been in the room, that none
but Vane-Cartwright unlatched that window.</p>

<p>I make this obvious reflexion now because
I made it then, and in making it wasted a
moment of possible talk with the girl, a trifling
waste which was near to having momentous
consequences. Of course it was not because
the girl had been standing then on the lawn
that Vane-Cartwright had taken the step, when
every unnecessary step involved risk, of wiling
the Trethewys away in this secret manner. He
knew she had something more to tell; she was
about to tell it me. “I hardly know,” she
broke in on my silence, “whether I ought to
think as I do, but I would like to tell you
what——” “Well, Ellen!” said, in cheerful
tones, a voice that was somehow not cheerful,
“taking a walk—who is the happy?—why, it
is Mr. Driver. I did not expect the good luck
of meeting you again so soon.” Where was I
staying, What good chance brought me there,
and Really I must move my luggage instantly
to his house, and so forth, from the last man
in the world whose company I desired at that
moment.</p>

<p>I got off staying with him. I got off, I know
not on what excuse, true or false, an afternoon’s
fishing and a pressingly urged dinner. But then
(for an idea struck me) I would, if I had finished
the sermon I was writing for a Saint’s day
service (not in the calendar, I fear) at a
neighbouring church to-morrow, stroll over to
Vane-Cartwright’s after my supper if he was in any
case going to be in. He would in any case
be in, and delighted to see me. He would be
in from seven onwards. He dined at 7.30, and
if I thought better of it would be delighted to
see me then, and I must not dress. For the
present, as Ellen had to go home, might he not
show me the short way to my inn. It was not
what I should have thought a short way, but it
was delightfully secluded, and it led us by quite
a curious number of places (a rather slippery
plank over a disused lock will do as an example),
where I fancied that an accident might have
befallen an unwary man with a too wary
companion. Perhaps it was only the condition of
my nerves that day that made me a little
proudly fancy such things, for I was not only
highly strung, I was unusually exhilarated. It
was a great change since our last meeting, for
this time I felt that I had at last gained a definite
advantage, and, little as he showed it, I thought
I was talking with a desperate man. It is not
safe to be dealing with a desperate man, but, if
you happen not to pity him, it is not a
disagreeable sensation. As we passed over a footbridge
(I was going first, and there were stakes and big
stones below on which a man might hurt
himself if he fell) it was probably one of my fancies
that the shadow of my companion, cast before
him, made an odd, quick movement with its arm.
Anyhow, I turned my head and said with a
laugh what a handsome stick Mr.
Vane-Cartwright was carrying. I asked what wood it
was. I did not ask whether it was loaded. He
told me what wood it was, where he bought it
and what he gave for it. He told me what
an interesting medallion was set in the head
of it, but he did not show me that medallion.
After that I had a further fancy. It was that
my guide took less polite pains than he had
taken to let me pass first through every narrow
place. Let me say at once that I do not
suppose he very seriously thought of
attacking me there; perhaps his eyes were open for
any very favourable spot, but perhaps it was
all my fancy. In spite of that fancy I was
thoroughly enjoying my walk. It was a new
sensation, to me to be doing most of the
conversation, and I was surprised and pleased with
myself to think that I was doing it well. Perhaps
I was doing it well, but I do not think it was
my guidance of the talk which brought it back
to the subject of Trethewy. Vane-Cartwright
managed to tell me that he hoped no rumour
of suspicion attached to Trethewy here, or to
any one at all connected with him. Would I
mind trying to find this out from the landlord
at the inn. He was a greater gossip than any
old woman in the place, and a shrewder one.
“I would not,” he added, “trust everything
he says, for he embroiders on what he has
heard; but he hears everything, and he is
shrewd, and I discovered a few weeks back
that he had an acquaintance in your old parish.”</p>

<p>By this time we were at the inn door, and I
noticed the landlord’s name, which was the same
as that of a man of doubtful character who had
come to Long Wilton just before I left it.
Several people were about, and they might, if
they chose, hear every word of what he spoke,
except when he dropped his voice. “Stop,” he
cried, and I stood still. “I am going to be
open with you, Mr. Driver, as open as I thought
you would have been with me. I have been
trying to bring myself to it all this walk, and I
will now. I have not said what I meant” (here
he dropped his voice) “about Trethewy. I have
really” (this in a whisper) “begun to suspect
him myself. Oh, yes, you laugh; I know what
you suspect of me. Do you think I cannot
see what interpretation you put upon every
one of my doings that you know of, in your own
house, at Peters’ before—long ago at the island
of Sulu, I daresay. You think” (this time so
loud that I thought the landlord and other
men must hear, though, as I reflected later, the
phrase he used was so chosen that a countryman
would not readily take it in), “you think I am
the assassin of Eustace Peters. Well, I am not.”
We turned and walked away again from the
inn. “I know,” he continued, “how things
look. I should not wonder if I were fated to
hang for this. I should not greatly care now,
for I have thought it so long, but hanging for
it and being guilty of it are different matters.”
He kept his eyes fixed steadily on me all this
while. “You thought things looked ugly for
Trethewy once, did you not? But I know
you thought him innocent when it was hard to
think so. I do not ask you to believe me, but
I ask you to keep the same firm, clear mind
now. You think Trethewy did not kill Peters.
So do I. He did not actually kill him, he no
more did that than you did. Now I know you
will answer me straight. You are too brave a
man to care about playing the part you played
at Florence. Have you found or have you not
found any direct evidence whatever, true or
false, that convicts any man—convicts him if
it is true—of making those tracks, or of going
to or coming from the place where they were
made? Shall I repeat my question? Is it not
clear, or are you still uncertain whether you will
answer it?” I could do no other; I told him
truly that I had nothing but inference to go
upon as to who made those tracks, and I told
him that my inference pointed to him.
“Naturally,” he said quietly (here we turned and paced
slowly towards the inn again). “Only, till you
have something better than that inference,
remember that there may be more subtle motives
than you think of for making false tracks.
Anyway (for it is no good my arguing with you
further, I see that), here is one piece of advice
that you may take or leave—honestly, you had
better take it if you value your future peace of
mind—keep your mind open a little longer.
Go away from here, and visit Long Wilton again
and hear what they say there now; or, if you
will not do that, stay here long enough to watch
Trethewy, and the girl, and the people that you
may see about with them,—one man in
particular. Well, good-bye, Mr. Driver, pardon
my saying I respect you in spite of Florence.”
The manner of this last remark was maddening.
I was keenly stung. I said, “Mr.
Vane-Cartwright, after all, Peters’ death is not the only
mysterious death you and I know of.” “Oh,
Longhurst,” he said, with a light laugh which
this time really took me aback. “I will tell
you anything you can wish to know about poor
Longhurst. Not now, as you are not in the
mind for it. To-night, if you think better of
your refusal to come, or any time you may
choose. I only wish,” he said sadly, as he finally
turned away, “old Peters had asked me straight
out about Longhurst.” He had puzzled me but
he had not shaken me. Could he have imagined
that he was likely to do so? Probably not, but
it occurred to me, directly he was gone, that he
now knew for certain that I was dangerous;
knew that in some ways he could play upon
me easily, and in some ways not at all; and
knew that I had not yet found out what I
came to find out from Ellen Trethewy.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch18">

<h2>Chapter XVIII</h2>

<p>Whether it was that my fancies pursued me
to the inn, or that Vane-Cartwright’s words had
unconsciously impressed me, I took and have
retained a great dislike to the gentleman who
was just arriving at the inn. He came, as he
said, for dry-fly fishing, but his accent and his
looks showed him to be native to a land where
dry fly-fishing is, I believe, not practised. He
was near me and about me several times in the
course of that day, and though he molested me
in no way, my dislike deepened. It was now
near midday and I contemplated taking no
further step till evening, so I had plenty of
time for thought, and I needed it. It may be
imagined that I was in a state of some tension.
I had rested little since I left Vane-Cartwright’s
hotel at Florence, and on arriving at the inn I
had news which increased my agitation. My
wife had telegraphed to my home saying she
had gone for a day or two to the Hôtel de
Brunswick, saying also, that I must pay no
attention to any wire, purporting to be from her,
which did not contain the word “Fidele”.
Evidently there was some one in Florence
whom she suspected would send false messages.
I conjectured that Vane-Cartwright had an
understanding with the Mafia, and had obtained
through them the services of some villain.
Well, here was a wire: “Regret to acquaint
respected sir, Mrs. Driver suddenly
unwell.—Direttore Hôtel Brunswick.”</p>

<p>There is one advantage about being tired.
It prevents the mind from wandering away on
so many side tracks. But with all that
advantage, whatever it may be worth, it took me a
full half-hour to make up my mind how to
regard this; but I came back to my first
impulse, not on the first occasion to disregard what
my wife herself had undoubtedly telegraphed.</p>

<p>On the other main points I may acquit myself
of having wavered, and I will not mystify the
reader more than I mystified myself. I had not
the faintest doubt that Vane-Cartwright’s
suggestion about the Trethewy family, whatever its
object might be, was a well-acted lie. However,
I determined to follow the suggestion to some
extent. I got hold of the landlord; he was all
that Vane-Cartwright had said, and on a very
slight hint he began talking of the Long
Wilton murder and of the charge against Trethewy.
I was disgusted to find that suspicion had
followed the people here. It was not clearly
to Vane-Cartwright’s interest that it should
follow them, and I suppose it was accident. I
found that the landlord was well posted as to
Trethewy’s story and all the proceedings in
regard to him. As he went on hinting
suspicion of him, I said it was a curious thing
about those tracks. “Ah,” said he, “little
feet can wear big shoes;” and he looked wise.
“About that lass now of Trethewy’s, not but
what I like the lass,” he was continuing after a
solemn interval, but I need not try to repeat
his talk. The upshot of the suggestion was
simply this, that the girl had stepped out in her
father’s boots and made the tracks, knowing full
well that she could ensure the detection of the
false tracks hereafter, but for which of two
reasons rumour was not certain. Either it
was really to fasten false suspicion on her father
till the guilty man, a lover of hers presumably,
made good his escape; or her father had
committed the crime, and she knew it, and to save
him had fabricated against him evidence which
he and she knew would be broken down.</p>

<p>It was not a likely story to tell to me, and I
was inclined now, not for the first time, to be
thankful that however great a fool I might be,
I looked a greater fool than I was. By putting
me up to eliciting this story, Vane-Cartwright
had merely supplied me with knowledge about
the situation of the Trethewys which I might
find useful in dealing with them.</p>

<p>I felt that I had brought danger not only
upon myself but also upon the Trethewys. I
was in some doubt whether by going to them
again that night I might not be bringing danger
nearer them, but the impulse to be beside them
if danger were there impelled me to go. I
arrived about nightfall. I found Trethewy
himself preparing to leave the house. He had
been bidden to go and help in repairing a
threatening breach of a mill-dam some way up
the stream, and he evidently felt surprised and
suspicious about the errand on which he was
sent. Replying to a look of enquiry in my
face, he said: “Sir, I never disobeyed my
master’s orders yet”. “No,” he added, looking
suddenly abashed, “I behaved badly enough
by my old master, but I never disobeyed orders,
and I should not like to begin doing so now.”
I said that, if he went I should stay at his house
till he returned. He said, “It would be a
kindness that I should always remember, sir”. And
so he went.</p>

<p>Poor Mrs. Trethewy appeared ill-pleased at
my presence. She seemed to guess that my
coming was in some way to disturb their peace.
I fancied that, in getting the mastery over his
drinking and his wrathful ways, Trethewy had
become very gentle and submissive to his wife.
In her days of difficulty I had been used to
admire her for the way in which she brought up
her daughter. I now did not think her improved
by finding herself more the mistress of her house
than she was wont to be. Still she was civil
enough, and willing, after the girl had gone to
bed in a sort of cupboard off the parlour-kitchen,
to entertain me with her best conversation. I
interrupted by telling her frankly that I knew
she wished to keep her daughter in ignorance of
all concerning Peters’ murder, and the suspicion
that had arisen about it, but that I feared that
she would find it impossible, for I had learned
that day that rumour had followed them to their
new home. From my heart I pitied her, for she
seemed utterly cast down as she began to realise
that Ellen must come to hear all, if indeed she
had not heard it already.</p>

<p>Suddenly the girl burst into the room and
threw her arms round her mother’s neck. “Oh,
mother, mother!” she said, “I cannot keep
on deceiving you. Dear, kind mother, who
wanted to deceive me for my good. I would
have given so much that you should not know
this, but grandmother told me all.” “Go to
bed now, dear,” said her mother; “I cannot
bear more to-night.” The mother too went to
bed, and I lay down under a rug upon the
sofa.</p>

<p>I had no intention of keeping awake all
night. Gladly as in my excited state I would
have done so, it was a necessity that I should
get such rest as I could. I lay on a shake-down
which Mrs. Trethewy provided for me, and I
thought of Florence and of one whom I had
left at Florence. Then I slept, and I dreamed,
dreamed that she was ill and wanted me. I
woke with a horrid start as some one in my
dream pronounced the word “poison”. Thank
God, it was a dream. I assured myself of that
and slept again to dream more pleasantly.</p>

<p>I dreamed I was a boy and I was swimming
in a clear river. Cool, cool river!</p>

<p>There was a fish in the river, and I was
swimming after the fish. Cool, cool river!</p>

<p>It was an ugly fish, and I was pursuing it, and
the river was warm.</p>

<p>The fish was Vane-Cartwright, and I was
pursuing him. Warm, warm river!</p>

<p>The river was gone from my dream, and I
was pursuing Vane-Cartwright over a great
plain. Warmer and warmer!</p>

<p>I pursued him through thick woodlands.
Sultry and stifling!</p>

<p>I pursued him over a great mountain.
Burning, burning hot!</p>

<p>I leapt to my feet calling “Fire!”</p>

<p>In waking fact, the thatched cottage was in a
blaze.</p>

<p>I called with all my might to Mrs. Trethewy.
I told her to run out while I brought out her
daughter, and she answered.</p>

<p>I burst into the girl’s little room on the ground
floor. It was full of smoke; she was suffocating
before she could wake. I tore her from her
bed, and bore her through the door and on to
the footbridge. I turned my head back
towards the house to call again to Mrs. Trethewy,
when a hoarse cry of “Fire!” came from the
other direction, and a man—he seemed an old
grey-bearded rustic—ran on to the bridge
towards the door, dashed with full force against us,
and overturned me and my half-conscious burden.</p>

<p>I do not know just how we rolled or fell, but
we were in the water. I had managed still to
hold Ellen Trethewy with my right arm, and
with my left hand to catch the edge of the
footbridge. I could not by any effort have pulled
us both out or raised her on to the bridge, but
it was easy to hold our heads above water, for
we were against the pier of the bridge, in
between the two currents that shot under the
arches. Mrs. Trethewy would be there in a
moment and could help us out; or—why did
not that old rustic help us?</p>

<p>They say that men in moments of extreme
peril take in all manner of things with
extraordinary rapidity, but I do not know whether
I really saw all as I see it in memory now, or
whether what I did was from accident and the
instinct of fear.</p>

<p>I glanced up, and the old rustic stood over us
raising a mighty stick which I thought was not unlike
that which Vane-Cartwright had carried in the
morning. So much I did see and think.</p>

<p>One good blow and I should have been
stunned, if my brains were not out. Whether
we got entangled in the eel grating or were
carried right under the fish-house into the pool,
there was little chance for either of our lives if
that blow had fallen where it was aimed.</p>

<p>I let go my hold on the bridge and threw my
head back, and the stick crashed idly on the
bricks of the margin. I tried to get one long
breath before we went under, but I swallowed
a horrible gulp of water. Good chance or my
convulsive effort guided us into the arch for
which I would have steered. Under one arch
the old eel grating remained. I did not know
its structure, and I did not know whether the
trap-door over it was fastened down, but there
was little hope that we should pass that way
alive. Under the other arch, as I had found that
morning, the grating had long been removed,
and down that archway the strong stream was
carrying us, safe, if it did not throttle us on the
way. How long a passage I thought it, though
the rush of the water seemed so headlong. I
could feel the slimy growth on the brick
archway above us, and my nostrils were for a moment
above water though my mouth was pressed
under. Then we were under the floor of the
fish-house, and my head rose and I got a gulp
of air, but my head struck a joist of the floor,
and the stream swept me on, ducking
involuntarily under another joist and another. We
were out in the pool, sucked down in the bubble
and swirl of the eddy. I opened my eyes and
could see the glare of the fire through great
green globes of water. I was on the surface; I
was swimming with great gasps; I was under
again; I was exhausted. My feet struck on
pebbles: I was standing in the shallow water.
I still held the body. Was it lifeless? Three
strides and I should land her on the bank. No,
my steps sank in some two feet of almost liquid
mud. The dragging of my steps furnished just
the little further effort needed to spend my
remaining breath. I sank forward on the reeds
and flags of the margin, with one last endeavour
to push her body in front of me, and I lay,
helpless and panting horribly, beside her, while a
man came and jumped into the marshy fringe
of the pool and stood over us. That dire old
rustic, I felt no doubt, and I felt no care. No,
it was the girl’s father.</p>

<p>In the morning, shooting down that same
dark cool avenue of sweet water, and swept
without an effort far out into the swirling
reed-fringed pool, I could not have imagined how
hardly and how ill I was to pass that way again
with a living or lifeless burden.</p>

<p>She lived; the first shock of the water had
roused her, and she had kept a shut mouth, a
steady grasp where it least incommoded me and
a heroic presence of mind.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch19">

<h2>Chapter XIX</h2>

<p>There is not much that can be done for a
thatched cottage once well alight, and for such
salvage as could be done there were plenty of
ready helpers soon upon the scene. That aged
rustic was not among them, nor did I afterwards
see or hear of him; but among them before long
appeared Vane-Cartwright himself, brisk and
alert, and forward to proffer to Trethewy every
sort of help and accommodation for his now
homeless family. Trethewy’s response was
characteristic—total and absolute silence.</p>

<p>It seemed late but was still early morning
when I had the Trethewys assembled for
breakfast in my private sitting-room in my inn.
Neighbours had readily supplied the women
with clothes, and a cart had been forthcoming
to carry them. Trethewy and I walked to the
inn together, and his attitude to Vane-Cartwright
was naturally quite altered. He told me a
second time of the dislike, which he had felt
from the first, of being in Vane-Cartwright’s
service, and he told me that he had just decided
to accept a situation which was open to him in
Canada, and had expected to sail with his family,
who did not yet know it, in six weeks, but
supposed he must put it off now.</p>

<p>At last I really heard what it was that Ellen
Trethewy could tell and for knowing which she
had been removed to Crondall, and it did not
come up to my expectations.</p>

<p>About noon after Peters’ murder, after
Callaghan and I had gone into the village, and
while Vane-Cartwright, by his own account,
had stayed reading in the house, the girl had
twice seen him as she looked out of the window
of the cottage. She had seen him come out of
the gate of the drive and turn to the right up
the road away from the village. About twenty
minutes later she had seen him turn in again at
the gate, and this time he came down the green
lane. To any one who knew the lie of the
ground, the significance of this was certain.
He could not have got round by road or by
any public footpath in that time; either he had
come through the plantation and the fields,
where the tracks were made, or he must have
made a round over ditches and hedges and
rough ground by which a man taking a casual
and innocent stroll was extremely unlikely to
have gone, especially in frost and snow.</p>

<p>The inference was convincing enough to me,
but then, as I knew, I was ready to be
convinced. Vane-Cartwright was not likely, I felt,
to have done so much to prevent the girl
revealing merely this. Was there nothing more?</p>

<p>Yes, there was, but it was something of which
Ellen did not feel sure. During that twenty
minutes the sun shone out brilliantly upon the
snow, and tempted her to stroll out a little
way up the drive, when she stood for awhile to
look, in spite of the horror of the time, with
delight at the spotless covering of the lawn and
the shining burden of the cedar branches, and
then up at the sun. Her eyes were soon so
dazzled that all sorts of fancied shapes danced
before them. Turning suddenly and looking
towards the field, she thought for an instant, but
only an instant, that she saw between two trees
a man up in the field, about half-way up,
walking towards the hedge, towards a spot in the
hedge which we already know. She covered
her eyes with her hand and looked again with
clearer vision. There was no one there, and
she tried to brush aside the fancy that she had
seen any one. But somehow she had often
wondered since about what she had seen, and
somehow she connected it in her fancy with the
murder. She could not connect it with the
making of the tracks, for she had only read of
them in a muddled newspaper report which had
given an entirely wrong impression as to
whereabouts they were found. Now it was all
obvious. Vane-Cartwright, while he made those
very tracks, had passed before her eyes; he had
seen her standing and looking towards him, and
he could not entertain the hope, though it was
true, that her eyes did not see him clear.</p>

<p>This much being plain, my first thought was
of amazement at the coolness of
Vane-Cartwright on the evening after the murder, while
he could not be sure that the discovery of the
tracks had not been told to the girl and had not
already drawn forth from her an explanation
which, if believed, must be fatal to him. My
second thought was of great disappointment that
the identification of him with the maker of the
tracks was still to so large an extent a matter
of inference. I cannot say whether I myself,
or Trethewy, or the girl, who, having long
brooded over these matters without the
necessary clue, now showed astonishing quickness in
grasping them, was first to see the next step
which the enquiry required. Evidence must be
sought which would show whether
Vane-Cartwright or some other person had undone the
window-latch in Peters’ room. I was ready
immediately to rush off to Long Wilton and see
whether Sergeant Speke could recollect
anything of importance about the movements of
the persons who were in the room that morning.
It was the girl who suggested to me a possible
witness rather nearer at hand. The young
doctor had been in the room till nearly the last,
and, as her mother happened to have told her,
he had very shortly after the event in question
removed to London. Could not I see him?</p>

<p>I resolved to see him, if I could, that day,
for I thought I could gain nothing by further
waiting near Crondall. I was anxious about
the safety of Ellen Trethewy, but I found her
father, who was as much persuaded as I of the
peril which continued to hang over her, had
formed his own plan for promptly removing
her; he thought we should be safer separate;
and it reassured me to see a reminiscence of
his wild youth sparkle in his now sober
countenance as he said that it would not be the first
time that he had baffled a pursuit.</p>

<p>Upon some calculation, prompted perhaps by
excessive precaution and futile craft, such as
may well be excused in excited men who have
found themselves surrounded by unimagined
dangers, we decided that I should not start for
any of the stations on the branch line that
passes Crondall, but should leave my luggage
behind, drive, in a fast trap which the baker
sometimes let out, to an ancient castle in the
neighbourhood, thence, three miles, to the
junction on the main line to London, send the trap
back with a note to my landlord, and go to
town by the one fast train in the day which
there was easy time to catch. I suppose we
thought I should get some start of
Vane-Cartwright, and that this was worth while, as he
was likely to stick close to me, and had shown
already his fertility of baleful resource.</p>

<p>Accordingly, I arrived at the junction just as
the up-train came in. The train from Crondall
had arrived a little while before, and was
standing in a bay on the other side of my platform
of departure. I was by this time so sleepy that
I could hardly keep my eyes open as I walked.
I did barely notice the screaming approach of
a third train, which was in fact the down-train
from London, but in which of course I felt no
interest, and I noticed some but not quite all of
the people on the platform or in the
waiting-shed. I took my seat in the far corner of a
carriage. I began instantly to doze, and the
train, I believe, waited there awhile. I faintly
heard shouts and whistles which heralded the
starting of the train, but it did not start
immediately. When the carriage door again
opened and two other passengers got in, I did
half-open my eyes; but I started broad awake
when to those half-open eyes my
fellow-passengers revealed themselves as Vane-Cartwright
and the foreign visitor at the inn, whose looks I
had irrationally disliked. I say broad awake—but
not awake enough to do the proper thing to
be done. The train was already in motion before
they sat down, and my fellow-passengers with
their luggage so encumbered the door that I
could not have got back on to the platform.
I ought, I suppose, to have pulled the
communication cord. As it was, I merely sat up, looking
at them as indifferently as I could, while really
my heart sank within me, and I wished my
muscles had not been so stiff and chilled from
my adventure of the night before.</p>

<p>The train was moving but not yet fast. It
seemed to be slowing down again. There was
fresh shouting and whistling on the platform;
the stationmaster saying angrily, “Put him in
here”; a voice that sounded somehow well
known, but which I could not recognise,
answering him vigorously; and just as the train began
to go faster a big man, still shouting and very
hot with pursuit, tumbled into the carriage. To
my delighted surprise I found myself joined by
Callaghan.</p>

<p>The most surprising turns of good fortune, I
have learned to think, are generally the reward
of more than common forethought on the part
of some one. My rescue in this case, which I
will none the less call providential, could never
have happened but for the zealous care of
Callaghan himself, and of another person many
hundred miles from the scene.</p>

<p>But of all this I was soon to hear.
Meanwhile, Callaghan, who was in the highest of
spirits, bestowed on me a mere smile of
recognition, and poured himself forth upon
Vane-Cartwright with an exuberance of pleasure at
the unexpected meeting which must have been
maddening. It was the only time, during my
acquaintance with Vane-Cartwright, when he
appeared to be in the least at a loss. Hearty
good-humour was, I should think, the only
attitude towards him which he did not know how
to meet. So he passed, I take it, a miserable
journey. Nor was his mysterious companion
left to enjoy himself. To my astonishment
Callaghan addressed him politely by a
strange-sounding name, which I suppress, but which
from the start which the gentleman gave
appeared to be his name.</p>

<p>As for me, Callaghan leaving me in the
corner which I had originally chosen had
manœuvred Vane-Cartwright into the other
corner of the same side of the carriage, and the
stranger into the seat opposite him, while he
placed himself between me and Vane-Cartwright,
and with his back half-turned towards me
entertained them both.</p>

<p>I dozed away again and again, and I daresay
I was asleep for a good part of the journey,
but I endeavoured to think out in my waking
moments what was the nature of the peril which
had threatened me, for peril assuredly there
was, and how it could have come about that I
was thus rescued.</p>

<p>As to the former question, I got no further
than the reflexion, that to stick me with a knife
and jump on the line or make a bolt at the
London terminus (which was our first stop)
would have been too crude for the purpose.
As to the latter question, Callaghan, suffering
our fellow-passengers to escape for a moment
behind their newspapers, roused me with a
nudge, and surreptitiously passed me what
proved to be several pounds’ worth of
telegraphic message from my wife at Florence to
himself. I was hardly yet aware how thoroughly
my wife’s original aversion for Callaghan had
given way in the day when he had been her
guest, and when she had passed from observing
his weaknesses to putting up with them and
occasionally reproving them. I learned now
that a few hours after I had left her, my wife
had telegraphed to Callaghan through a mutual
friend whom she believed would have his
address, stating the sort of errand on which I had
gone, and the few particulars known to her
which might determine my movements, and
entreating him to find me, and having found
me, never to leave me alone. But that was not
all. The telegram stated that Vane-Cartwright
was on his way home, having sent home one
communication only, a telegram to a registered
telegraphic address in London, that address
being the word by which Callaghan had accosted
the stranger.</p>

<p>As I afterwards learned, my wife, directly I
had departed, had removed to Vane-Cartwright’s
hotel. Vane-Cartwright did not know her by
sight, and, if he had discovered her, he was the
sort of man who would probably despise the
intelligence of any nice woman. She had taken
the best rooms in the hotel, close to
Vane-Cartwright’s, and had otherwise set about, for
the first time in her life, and for a few hours,
to throw money about in showy extravagance.
By money and flattery she had contrived to be
informed of the address of every letter and
telegram that Vane-Cartwright sent before his
departure, of the name and nationality (nothing
more was known of him) of his only visitor that
morning, and of the further fact that shortly
after Vane-Cartwright’s departure that visitor
had returned and had enquired whether she had
moved to that hotel, but had not asked to see
her. She learned also that Vane-Cartwright
had been at the station when the Milan train
started, but had returned and waited for the next
train. The reader already knows that she had
had the intuition that false messages might be
sent me in her name.</p>

<p>Callaghan had been away from home, and
had not got the message till late in the evening
before he joined me. He lost no time in going
to my house to ascertain my address and what
had last been heard of me. He called also at
Vane-Cartwright’s house, where he was only
informed that he was abroad. He left London
by the first train in the morning armed with
a <i>Bradshaw</i> and a map. Study of <i>Bradshaw</i> had
led him to notice that I might possibly be
leaving by a train which would be at the junction
about the same time as his. So he was on the
look out, and with his quick sight actually saw
me in my train as he arrived. By running hard
and shouting entreaties and promises to the
officials, he had just managed to catch me.</p>

<p>When our train arrived at Paddington,
Callaghan shook me awake. It appeared to me
that Vane-Cartwright, who had not been
conversational before, had just started an interesting
subject by which he hoped to detain Callaghan
while our mysterious companion got away from
the train. It was not a successful effort.
Callaghan pushed me somewhat rudely out of the
carriage, and jumping out after me told me to
wait for him, and kept me, while he stood about
on the platform till every passenger by the train
but ourselves had gone away. At last he called
a hansom; still he did not enter it till the driver
of an invalid carriage which had been waiting
in the rank of cabs appeared to give up the
expectation that the person for whom he waited
was coming, and drove away.</p>

<p>“Do you see that invalid carriage?” said
Callaghan to me. “It was ordered for you.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch20">

<h2>Chapter XX</h2>

<p>Here let me mention that I have fancied since
that I recognised the ill-looking foreigner who
was with me at the inn and in the train. I
recognised him in a chemist’s shop in a very
fashionable shopping street. I think it would
be libellous to name the street. The telegraphic
address which my wife sent to Callaghan was
the telegraphic address of that fashionable
chemist’s shop.</p>

<p>I had intended to take leave of Callaghan for
the time upon our arrival at the station, but I
found that this was not to be done, for Callaghan
was determined to obey almost to the letter my
wife’s behest to him, not to leave me. He took
me to luncheon at a restaurant, and then
prevailed upon me to come with him by one of our
fast trains to my own house, collect there all
the papers which I possessed bearing on the
affair of Peters, and bring them to his chambers,
where he was resolved I should at present stay.</p>

<p>When we arrived there, I was for starting at
once to seek out the doctor who had been at
Long Wilton, but I was practically overpowered
and sent to bed, after handing over to Callaghan,
amongst other papers, the notes which Peters
had made as to the death of Longhurst.</p>

<p>After some hours Callaghan entered my
room to tell me that dinner would be ready in
half an hour, that I might get up for it if I liked,
or have it brought to my bedroom. He then
turned on me reproachfully. “Why had I not
shown him these papers long ago, when he
came to stay with me?” I was at a loss for an
answer, for in fact when I had told him of my
suspicions and my reasons for them, I had done
the thing by halves, because my want of
confidence in him lingered.</p>

<p>“Well, well,” said my good-natured friend,
“I daresay I can guess the reason. But these
papers explain much to me. You never told
me it was the island of Sulu on which Peters
discovered the body, or that he went there with
Dr. Kuyper. I had heard the name of that
island and the doctor before—on the last night
of Peters’ life while you were talking music with
Thalberg.”</p>

<p>Next morning I set off early to see the doctor
who had been at Long Wilton. Callaghan, who
at first seemed to think it his duty to be with
me everywhere, gave way and consented to go
upon some business of his own about which
he was very mysterious; but he put me in the
charge of his servant, a man singularly fitted to
be his servant, an Irishman and an old soldier,
who, I discovered, had made himself very useful
to him in his spying upon Thalberg, having
entered into a close and I daresay bibulous
friendship with one of Thalberg’s clerks. My
new guardian so far relaxed his precautions as
to allow me to be alone with the doctor in his
consulting-room; he otherwise looked after me
as though he thought me a child, and from
the very look of him one could see that I was
well protected, though indeed I hardly imagined
then that the perils which beset me at Crondall
would follow me through the streets of London.</p>

<p>I asked the doctor kindly to give me all his
recollections as to what occurred in Peters’
bedroom while he was there. He told me little
but what was of a professional nature, and he
informed me rather dryly that he made it his
practice on all occasions to observe only what
concerned him professionally. I therefore put
to him with very little hope the main question
which I had come to ask—Had he observed
anything about the windows. “Certainly,” he
said, “that, as it happens, is a professional matter
with me. I never enter a sickroom without
glancing at the windows, and I did so from force
of habit this time, though” (and he laughed with
an ugly sense of humour) “it didn’t matter
much, as no fresh air could have revived that
patient; but the windows were shut, and (for I
often notice that too) they were tight shut and
latched.” “Are you certain,” I said, “that
both of them were latched?” “Certain,” he
answered; “they were both latched when I
came into the room, and they were latched
when I went out, for I happened to have looked
again. You see that, once one has the habit
of noticing a certain kind of thing, one always
notices it and remembers it easily, however little
else one may see.” I asked him then whether
he happened to remember the order in which
the persons who had then been in the room
left it. About this he was not so certain, but
he had an impression that only two persons
were left in the room after him. These were
the police-sergeant, who held the door open for
a moment while Vane-Cartwright lingered, and
who locked it when they had all left. I may
say at once that this was afterwards confirmed
by the police-sergeant, who added that
Vane-Cartwright was standing somewhere not far
from the window in question.</p>

<p>I returned by appointment to Callaghan’s
chambers some time before eleven. I was
immediately taken out by him again upon an
errand which he refused to explain. We
arrived at length at an office in the City which
from the name on the door proved to be that
of Mr. Thalberg, Solicitor and Commissioner
for Oaths. We were ushered into Mr.
Thalberg’s private room, and it immediately appeared
that Callaghan had come to give instructions
for the making of his will. He explained my
being there by saying there was a point in his
will about which he desired to consult both of
us. I was thus compelled to be present at what
for a while struck me as a very tedious farce.
Callaghan, after consulting Mr. Thalberg upon
the very elementary question whether or not he
thought it an advisable thing that a man should
make a will, and after beating about the bush
in various other ways, went on to detail quite
an extraordinary number of bequests, some of
them personal, some of a charitable kind, which
he desired to make. There was a bequest, for
example, of the Sèvres porcelain in his chambers
to his cousin, Lady Belinda McConnell (there
was no Sèvres porcelain in his chambers, and
I have never had the curiosity to look up Lady
Belinda McConnell in the Peerage). So he
went on, disposing, I should think, of a great
deal more property than he possessed, till at
last the will appeared to be complete in outline,
when he seemed suddenly to bethink him of the
really difficult matter for which he had desired
my presence. By this time, I should say, it had
begun to dawn upon me that the pretended
will-making was not quite so idle a performance as
I had at first thought. Callaghan must in the
course of it have produced on a person, who
knew him only slightly, the impression of a
good-natured, eccentric fellow, wholly without
cunning and altogether unformidable. This
was one point gained, but moreover, Mr.
Thalberg was rapidly falling into that nervous and
helpless condition into which a weak man of
business can generally be thrown by the unkind
expedient of wasting his time. It now appeared
that the real subject on which Mr. Thalberg and
I were to be consulted was the disposal of
Callaghan’s papers in the event of his death.
Callaghan explained that he would leave
behind him if he died (and he felt, he said, that he
might die suddenly) a great quantity of literary
work which he should be sorry should perish.
He would leave all his papers to the discretion
of certain literary executors (he thought these
would perhaps be Mr. George Meredith and
Mr. Ruskin), but there were memoirs among
them relating to a sad affair in which persons
living, including Mr. Thalberg and myself,
were in a manner concerned. He referred to
the lamented death of Mr. Peters, the
circumstances connected with which had been for him
a matter of profound and he trusted not
unprofitable study. He felt that in any directions
he might leave in regard to these memoirs it
was only fair that he should consult the
gentlemen present. Mr. Thalberg by this time was
in a great state of expectation, when Callaghan
pulled out his watch and, observing that it was
later than he thought, asked if there was a
Directory in the office, that he might find the
address of a certain person to whom he must
telegraph to put off an appointment with him.
A clerk brought the London Directory from an
outside room, and was about to retire. “Stop
a moment, Mr. Clerk, if you don’t mind,” said
Callaghan, and he slightly edged back his chair,
so as to block the clerk’s going out, “perhaps it
is the Suburban Directory that I want. Let us
just look,” and he began turning over the leaves.
“Ferndale Avenue,” he said, “that’s not it;
Ferndale Terrace—you see, Mr. Thalberg,” he
said, “I would like to talk this matter out with
you before I go—Ferndale Crescent—right side,
No. 43, 44, No.” (all this time his finger was
running down a column under the letter B in
the Trades Directory) “45, 46, 47; I thought
he was thereabouts. Here’s the name,” he said.
“You see, Mr. Thalberg, your own movements,
if they were not explained, would look rather
curious—47, 49, no, that’s not it—look rather
curious, as I was saying, in connexion with that
murder of Peters—look ugly, you know—51
Ferndale Crescent, that’s it. Thank you, Mr.
Clerk,” and he shut the Directory with a bang
and handed it back to the clerk with a bow, and
made way for him to leave the room.</p>

<p>Mr. Thalberg bounded from his chair and
collapsed into it again. “Stop, Mr. Manson,”
he cried to the clerk, “you must be present at
whatever else this gentleman may have to say.”
He sat for a moment breathing hard, more I
thought with alarm than with anger. He did
not seem to me to have any presence of mind
or any of the intellectual attributes, at any rate,
of guile, and I could not help wondering as I
watched him, whether this really was the man
whom Vane-Cartwright chose for his agent
in employments of much delicacy. “Do you
come here to blackmail me, sir?” cried Mr.
Thalberg, forcing himself to assume a voice and
air of fury. There was never seen anything
more innocent or more surprised and pained
than the countenance of Callaghan as he replied.
He was amazed that his motive could be so
misunderstood; it was the simple fact that what
he was forced in his memoirs to relate might
hereafter suggest suspicions of every one who
was in the neighbourhood of the crime, himself
and his friend Mr. Driver in particular, and,
though in a less degree of course, Mr. Thalberg.
He was giving Mr. Thalberg precisely the same
opportunity as he had given to Mr. Driver, of
explaining those passages in his (Callaghan’s)
record, which might seem to him to require
explanation. Here he appealed to me (and I
confess I backed him up) as to whether he had
not approached me in precisely the same way.
Mr. Thalberg appeared to pass again under the
spell of his eccentric visitor’s childlike innocence,
and sat patiently but with an air of increasing
discomfort while Callaghan ran on: “You see,
in your case, Mr. Thalberg, it’s not only your
presence at Long Wilton, which was for golf of
course, wasn’t it?—only you went away
because of the snow. There is that
correspondence with a Dutch legal gentleman at Batavia
which occurred a little afterwards, or a little
before was it? And there were the messages
which I think you sent (though perhaps that
was not you) to Bagdad. Of course I shall
easily understand if you do not care to
enlighten me for the purpose of my memoirs
which no one may care to read. Pray tell me
if it is so. I daresay it’s enough for you that
your correspondence and movements will of
course be fully explained at the trial.” “What
trial?” exclaimed Thalberg, quite aghast. It
was Callaghan’s turn to be astonished. Was it
possible that Mr. Thalberg had not heard the
news, which was already in two or three evening
papers, that there was a warrant out for the
arrest of Vane-Cartwright, and that it was
rumoured that he had been arrested in an
attempt to escape from the country.</p>

<p>In Mr. Thalberg’s countenance increased
anguish now struggled ludicrously with the
suspicion, which even he could not wholly put
aside, that he was being played upon in some
monstrous way. He began some uncertain
words and desisted, and looked to his clerk
appealingly. That gentleman (not, I believe,
the same that had fallen under the sway of
Callaghan’s faithful servant) seemed the
incarnation of the most solid respectability. He
was, I should judge, of the age at which he
might think of retiring upon a well-earned
competence, and he gave Thalberg no help,
desiring, I should think, to hear the fullest
explanation of the startling and terrible hint
which had been thrown out before him against
his master’s character. While Thalberg sat
irresolute, Callaghan drew a bow at a venture.
“At least, Mr. Thalberg,” he said, “I thought
you might like to tell me the results of your
interview with Dr. Verschoyle when you went
to Homburg to see him.” “Sir,” said
Thalberg, making a final effort, “do you imagine
that I shall tell you what passed at an interview
to which I went upon my client’s business.”
“Thank you, Mr. Thalberg,” said Callaghan.
“I am interested to know that you went to
Homburg on your client’s business (I thought
it might have been for the gout), and that you
did see Dr. Verschoyle, for I had not known
that till you told me. I did know, however,
about that correspondence with Madrid in the
Spanish Consul’s cipher, and I knew that the
enquiries you made through him were really
addressed to an influential person at Manilla.”</p>

<p>At this point Mr. Thalberg abruptly went
over, with horse, foot and artillery, to the
enemy. He assured Callaghan of his perfect
readiness to answer fully any questions he might
ask about his relations with Vane-Cartwright,
and if he might he would tell him how they began.</p>

<p>This is what it came to. Thalberg had been
partner to a lawyer who was Longhurst’s
solicitor. In the early part of 1882, when
Longhurst had spent a month in England, he
had consulted Thalberg’s partner about some
matters that troubled him in regard to his
partnership with Vane-Cartwright. Thalberg
could not remember (so at least he said) the
precise complaint which Longhurst had laid
before his partner, except that it related to
Vane-Cartwright’s having got concessions and
acquired property for himself which Longhurst
considered (without foundation, as Thalberg
supposed) should have belonged to the
partnership. Nor did Thalberg know the advice
which had been given Longhurst. He had
heard no more of him beyond the mere report
that he had been drowned, till, after his death,
Vane-Cartwright, whom Thalberg had not
previously known, came to London and employed
the firm to find out various members of
Longhurst’s family who were still living, and to whom
he now behaved with great generosity. Since
then Thalberg had been, as we knew, solicitor of
a company which Vane-Cartwright had founded,
and had occasionally done for him private law
work of a quite unexciting nature. But in the
middle of January of last year, 1896, Thalberg
had been instructed by Vane-Cartwright to
make for him with the utmost privacy certain
enquiries. One was of a person in Bagdad, as
to the identity and previous history of a certain
Mr. Bryanston; one concerned a certain Dr.
Kuyper, a physician and scientist in Batavia,
who, it was ascertained, was now dead.
Another was, as Callaghan knew, addressed to a
correspondent in Madrid, but Thalberg declared
that this enquiry went no further than to ascertain
the name and address of the person who then
filled the office of Public Prosecutor or, I think,
Minister of Justice in the Philippines. I ventured
to ask the name; it was a name that I had seen
before in those notes of Peters’. Lastly, there
was an enquiry in regard to Dr. Verschoyle.
Thalberg had been instructed if possible to
obtain an interview with this gentleman before
a certain date. The purpose of the interview,
he declared, was to obtain from him some notes
and journals which would be of use in the
foundation of a new mission in the Philippines,
under the auspices of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, a project in which
Vane-Cartwright appeared, he said, to be
keenly interested (and indeed it was the fact
that he had previously patronised missionary
societies). The object of Thalberg’s visit to
Long Wilton was this. He had been told to
repair there without fail by the date on which
he actually came, and to inform
Vane-Cartwright by word of mouth of the result, if any,
of his enquiries. That result had been, shortly:
that Bryanston was the man who had at one
time been at Nagasaki; that Kuyper was dead;
that the Minister of Justice (or whatever the
precise office was) at Manilla was the person
already alluded to; and that Verschoyle was
abroad and had lately been at Siena, but had
departed abruptly some weeks before—for
Germany, it was thought, but he had left no
address behind him. All this Thalberg had
duly reported to Vane-Cartwright in Peters’
house the afternoon before the murder occurred.
And what all this taught Vane-Cartwright,
though in part obscure, is in part obvious. It
taught him that no letter from Verschoyle to
Peters need at present be expected. It taught
him that a letter from Bryanston, which must
be expected, might be dangerous and must be
intercepted. It taught him that Peters would
remain inactive only till that letter reached his
hands. It taught him also that if Peters were
put to silence, Kuyper, the other European who
had seen that body in Sulu, could tell no tales.</p>

<p>After Peters’ death, Thalberg, still acting
under instructions, had had an interview with
Dr. Verschoyle at Homburg, to which he had
traced him, and had taken with him a letter
written on the paper of the S.P.G., and signed,
as he believed, by the secretary of that society.
(It has since appeared that the secretary had no
knowledge of such a letter.) Dr. Verschoyle
delivered to him some journals which he,
Thalberg, never read, for transmission to
Vane-Cartwright, to whom he duly delivered them.
That, he said, was all that he knew of the
subjects on which Callaghan sought information.
He denied all knowledge of further
communications made on behalf of Vane-Cartwright with
that important official in the Philippines; but he
appeared to me somewhat nervous in answering
Callaghan’s questions on this matter, and anxious
to appease him with the prospect that he might
be able, through friends of his, to ascertain what
communications of this nature had actually
taken place.</p>

<p>It was curious to how many questions
suggested to us by what he had said he could give
no answer. Indeed he informed us, with an air
of moral self-complacency, that he thought it
a very sound maxim for a professional man to
know as little as possible of things which it was
not his business to know. I guessed that
perhaps his strict observance of this precept was
the thing which had commended him to the
service of Vane-Cartwright, but I really do
believe that Mr. Thalberg knew nothing behind
the facts which he now thought it convenient to
himself to reveal.</p>

<p>However that may be, he made no secret of
anything which he could disclose without injury
to himself. We had got from him, or I ought
to say Callaghan had got from him, evidence
which might serve to show plainly enough that
Vane-Cartwright was aware of Peters’ suspicions
and concerned himself greatly about them, and,
content with this, we were preparing to go when
Mr. Thalberg stopped us saying that there was
one important matter of which we had not asked
him yet, and perhaps should be surprised to know
that he could tell us anything. I have omitted
to say that in the course of the conversation he
had heard something from us about the things
which had led to Vane-Cartwright’s being
suspected. We had told him in substance the
story about the tracks, and were much surprised
to find that he appeared wholly ignorant of the
charge that had been brought against Trethewy.
He now told us a fact which had a great bearing
upon the history of those tracks. He asked us
whether or not Peters’ grounds could be seen
from the upper rooms of the hotel. I said that
no doubt they could, for the hotel was only too
visible from those grounds. He then stated
that having confined himself to his bedroom
until it was time for him to start for his train,
he had at a certain hour noticed a man walking
across Peters’ field (for from his description it
was plain to me that it was Peters’ field, and
plain further that the man was walking pretty
much where those tracks were made). This
man, even at that distance, he recognised as
Vane-Cartwright; he recognised him by his fur
coat and a cap which Ellen Trethewy had seen
him in, and by some peculiarity about his gait
which he knew well. The man was also
swinging his stick in Vane-Cartwright’s own particular
manner. The distance was considerable, but
I knew that it would be possible for a
clear-sighted man to recognise at that distance any
one whom he knew very well. The hour which
Thalberg named corresponded with what Ellen
Trethewy had told me.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch21">

<h2>Chapter XXI</h2>

<p>As we left Thalberg’s office and walked down
the narrow court which led to the street, I
daresay our looks and voices, if not our words,
betrayed the exultation of men who see a
long-sought object at last within reach. As we
turned into the street we were stopped by
Vane-Cartwright.</p>

<p>Only the day before I had been expecting to
find him lurking for me round every corner;
but now and here it startled me to meet him.
When I learnt why he met us, it startled me
still more, and looking back upon it, I still find
it unaccountable.</p>

<p>“Mr. Driver, Mr. Callaghan,” he said,
addressing us in turn in tones as quiet as ever,
but with a pale face and highly-strung manner,
“I am your prisoner.” I suppose we stared
for a moment, for he repeated, “I am your
prisoner. I will go with you where you like;
or you can give me in charge to the nearest
constable. There is one. You see you have
beaten me. You probably do not yet know it
yourselves, but you have.”</p>

<p>“Well,” he continued, “if you do not quite
know what you are going to do, I will ask one
thing of you. Before you give me up to justice,
take me somewhere where I can talk with you
two alone. I want to tell you my story. It
will not make you alter your purpose, I know
that; but it will make you respect me a little
more than you do. It is odd that I should
want that, but I do.”</p>

<p>“Well, gentlemen?” he said questioningly,
as we still hesitated, and his old self-possession
returning for a moment, a smile of positive
amusement came over his face.</p>

<p>I confess that if I had acted on my own
impulse I should have taken my antagonist at
his word when he suggested that we should call
the nearest policeman. But Callaghan had been
taking the lead in our late movements, and I felt
that the occasion belonged to Callaghan; and
Callaghan was more generous.</p>

<p>“If you have anything to say, sir,” he said,
“come to my chambers and say it.
Four-wheeler!”</p>

<p>In a moment more we were in a cab—how
slow the cab seemed—Callaghan sitting opposite
Vane-Cartwright and watching him narrowly lest
he should play us a trick, while I too watched
him all through the interminable drive, very
ill at ease as to the wisdom of our conduct, and
wondering what could be the meaning of the
unexpected and desperate hazard which our
antagonist was now taking. He was evidently
going to confess to us. But why? If the
knowledge we already possessed was sufficient,
as perhaps it was, to secure his conviction, yet
he could only partly guess what that knowledge
was; of the two most telling pieces of evidence
against him, the fact about the window-latch
which the surgeon had told us, and the fact
that Thalberg had recognised him afar from
his window in the hotel, he must have been
quite unaware. And then what did he expect
to gain by the interview which he had sought
with us? What opinion had he formed of the
mental weaknesses of the two men with whom
he was playing? Was he relying overmuch
upon the skill and mastery of himself and
others which he would bring to bear in this
strange interview? Had the fearful strain
under which he had been living of late taken
away the coolness and acuteness of his
judgment? Could he rely so much upon the
chance of enlisting our compassion that he
could afford to give us a certainty of his
guilt, which, for all he knew, we had not got
before, and to throw away the hope of making
an escape by flight, which with a man of his
resource might easily have been successful?
Or had he some other far more sinister hope
than that of stirring us to unworthy pity or
generosity? I could not resolve these
questions, but I was inclined to an explanation
which he was himself about to give us. If the
cause of suspicion against him became public
he would have lost everything for which he
greatly cared, and he was ready to risk all
upon any chance, however faint, of avoiding
this. I was, as I have said, ill at ease about
it all. I did not feel that after the conversation
I had held with him before, Vane-Cartwright
would get over me, but it is an experience
which one would do much to avoid, that of
listening obdurate to an appeal into which
another man puts his whole heart; and more
especially would one wish to have avoided
consenting to hear that appeal in a manner
which might raise false hopes. But for a
more serious reason it had been a mistake to
acquiesce in this interview; I had learned to
know not only Callaghan’s goodness of heart
but his cleverness and his promptitude, but I
had not learned to credit him with wisdom or
with firmness; and the sort of impulsiveness,
which had made him at once grant the
request for this interview, might easily have
further and graver consequences.</p>

<p>At last we were in Callaghan’s room and
seated ourselves round a table.</p>

<p>“I see,” said Vane-Cartwright, “that it
puzzles you gentlemen why I should ask for
this interview. You think I am an ordinary
criminal, which perhaps I am, and you thought
that like an ordinary criminal I should try all
means to save a disgraced life, which I certainly
shall not do. I know that you have not got the
knowledge which would convict me of murder.
I do not suppose you think you have, and in
any case you have not. And, if you had, I
think you know I have contrivance enough to
take myself off and live comfortably out of
reach of the law. But I do not care for
escape, and I do not care for acquittal. You
have the means to throw suspicion on me, and
that is enough for me. I cared for honour and
success, and I do not care for life when they
are lost.” He was looking at each of us
alternately with an inscrutable but quite unflinching
gaze, but he now hid his eyes, and he added
as if with difficulty, “Yet I did care for one
other thing besides my position in the world,
but that has gone from me too.</p>

<p>“And now,” he resumed, “that my struggle
is over, and that the people—more people and
bigger people than you would think—who have
been courting me for the last twelve months
will think of me only with as just abhorrence
as Thalberg himself does, I have an odd fancy,
and it is this: I should like to stand a little
better in the eyes of the very men who, far
from courting me, have had the courage to
suspect me and the tenacity to drag me down.”
He had raised his eyes again, but this time
fixed them on Callaghan only, for he
doubtless saw that I was out of touch with him, and,
seeing this, he had art enough to appear to
recognise and acquiesce in it.</p>

<p>“You know something of my story. Let
me tell you just a little more of it, and, please,
if it interests you enough, question me on any
point you will. I shall not shrink from
answering. If a man is known to have murdered two
of his friends, there cannot be much left that
it is worth his while to conceal. First, I would
like to speak of my early training. If I had
been brought up in the gutter, you could make
some allowance for that, and give me some
credit for any good qualities I had shown,
however cheerfully you might see me hanged
for my crimes. It is not usual to suppose that
any such allowance may have to be made for
a man brought up to luxury and to every sort
of refinement, and yet such a man too may be
the victim of influences which would kill the
good in most characters even more than they
have in mine. You may have heard a little
about my people, and perhaps know that their
views and ways were not quite usual; I am
not going to say one word against them (I
am not that sort of man, whatever I may be),
but there were two things in my boyhood
harder for me than the ordinary Englishman
can well imagine. I was brought up in the
actual enjoyment of considerable wealth and
the expectation of really great wealth, and just
when I was grown up the wealth and the
expectations suddenly vanished. That has
happened to many men who have been none the
worse for it. But then I was brought up soft.
You know I am not a limp man or a coward;
but I had all the bringing up of one; cared
for hand and foot, never doing a thing for
myself (my good people had great ideas of
republican simplicity, but they were only literary
ideas). None of the games, none of the sport
that other boys get; no rubbing shoulders with
my equals at school; no comradeship but only
the company of my elders, mostly invalids.
Few people know what it is to be brought up
soft. But there was worse than that. You”
(he was addressing Callaghan) “were piously
brought up. Oh, yes, you were really. I
daresay your home was not a strict one, and you
were not carefully taught precepts of religion
and morality or carefully shielded from the
sight of evil (perhaps quite the contrary, for I
have not the pleasure of knowing much about
you, Mr. Callaghan), but I am quite sure that
you had about you at home or at school, or
both, people among whom there was some
tacit recognition of right and wrong of some
sort as things incontrovertible, and that there
was some influence in your childhood which
appealed to the heart. But in my childhood
nothing appealed to the heart, nothing was
incontrovertible, above all, nothing was tacit.
Everlasting discussion, reaching back to the
first principles of the universe, and branching
out into such questions as whether children
should be allowed pop-guns. That was my
moral training, and that was all my moral
training. It was very sound in principle, I
daresay—and I am not going to pose as an
interesting convert to the religious way of
looking at things, for I am not one—but it did not
take account of practical difficulties, and it was
very, very hard on me. Not one man in ten
thousand has had that sort of upbringing, and
I do not suppose you can realise in the least
how hard that sort of thing is.</p>

<p>“So,” he continued, “I found myself at
twenty-one suddenly made poor; more accustomed than
most lads to think life only worth living for
refinements which are for the wealthy only; taught
not to take traditional canons of morality for
granted; taught to think about the real utility
of every action; landed in a place like Saigon,
and thrown in the society of the sort of gentry
who, we all know, do represent European
civilisation in such places; sent there to get a
living; thoroughly out of sympathy with all
the tastes and pleasures of the people round
me, and at the same time easily able to
discover that for all my strange upbringing I was
by nature more of a man than any one else there.
As a matter of fact, there was only one decent
man there with intellectual tastes, and that was
Peters; but Peters, who was only two or three
years older than I, and, as I own I fancied,
nothing like so clever, took me under his
protection and made it his mission to correct me,
and it did not do. You can easily imagine
how, in the three years before Longhurst came
on the scene, I had got to hate the prospect
of a life of humdrum, money-grubbing among
those people in the hope of retiring with a
small competence some day when my liver and
my brain were gone; you would not have
thought any the better of me if I had become
content with that. At any rate I did not. I
meant to be quit of it as soon as I could, and
I meant more. I resolved before I had been
three weeks in the place to make money on
a scale which would give me the position, the
society and the pursuits for which I had been
trained. I resolved in fact to make the sort of
place for myself in the world which every man,
except the three men in this room and Thalberg,
thinks I have secured. If I had no scruples as
to the way in which I should carry out that
resolve, I differed from the people around me only
in knowing that I had no scruples, and in having
instead a set purpose which I was man enough
to pursue through life. And I am man enough,
I hope, not to care much for life now that that
purpose has failed. If I pursued my end
without scruple, I think I was carrying out to its
logical conclusion the principles that had been
taught me as a boy; and, as I am not going to
seek your sympathy on false pretences, let me
tell you I do not know to-day that there are
any better principles—there may be; I hope
there are.</p>

<p>“I waited nearly three years, learning all I
could about business and about the East, its trade
and its resources, and waiting all the time for my
opportunity which I knew would come, and which
came. It came to me through Longhurst; but
I must go back a little. I have said that Peters
was my only equal in our society there. Now
let me say, once for all, that in nothing that I
am going to tell you do I wish to blame Peters
more than I blame myself; but from the first
we did not hit it off. Peters, as I have said,
took on himself the part of my protector and
adviser a little too obviously; he had not quite
tact enough to do it well, and I was foolish
enough in those days to resent what I thought
his patronage. At first there was no harm
done; Peters thought I should be the better if I
entered more into such sport as there was in the
place, for which I had very little taste, and he
tried to make me do so by chaffing me about
being a duffer, in his blunt way, which I thought
rude, and that before other people. You would
hardly imagine that I was ever shy, but I was;
and, absurd as it seems, this added a good deal
to my unhappiness in my new surroundings. I
should very soon have got over that, for I soon
found my way about the place, and my shyness
quickly wore off; but worse than that followed.
I was fond of arguing, and used to discuss all
things in heaven and earth with Peters. You
can easily suppose that his views and mine did
not agree, and I daresay now that I pained him
a good deal. I did not mean to do that, but I
did mean to shock him sometimes, and so I
often took a cynical line, by which I meant
nothing at all, telling him the sharp things that
I should do if I got the chance; and once or
twice I was fool enough to pretend that all sorts
of things of which Peters would not approve
went on in our business. To my amazement I
discovered after a time that Peters took all this
nonsense seriously. I would have given
anything to efface the impression that I had made,
for though there are few men that I ever
respected, Peters was one of them. But Peters
became reserved towards me and impossible to
get at. Then gossip came in between us. There
is sometimes very spiteful gossip in a little
European settlement in the East; and I am
certain, though I cannot prove it, that a man
there, with whom I had constant business, told
Peters a story about a shady transaction which
he said I was in. The transaction was real
enough, but neither I nor my firm had any
more to do with it than you. I know that this
man told it to other people, for I have heard so
from them, and I do not doubt that that was
what finally turned Peters against me. I tried
to tax Peters with having picked up this story,
but he said something which sounded like
disbelieving me, and I lost my temper and broke
off; and from that day till we met again at
Long Wilton we never exchanged any more
words together, though we crossed one another’s
path as you shall hear.</p>

<p>“Mind, again, I am not saying it was his fault;
but it is in itself doing a young man a very ill
turn to show him that you think him dishonest
when as yet he is not, and it did me harm.
Upon my soul, I was honest then; in fact, in that
regard, most of my dealings throughout life
would stand a pretty close scrutiny. But I
have often thought that I might have become
a much better man if Peters would have been
my friend instead of suspecting me unjustly;
and I confess that it rankles to this day, and all
the more because I always respected Peters.
After that, however, he did me some practical
ill turns, disastrously ill turns; rightly enough, if
he thought as he did. I must tell you that our
separation came a very little while before
Longhurst came to the place. Just afterwards I had
an opening, a splendid opening; it would not
have made me the rich man that I am, but it
would have given me a good position right
away, and what it would have saved me you
shall judge. A very eminent person came to
Saigon; he knew something of Peters and a little
of me. He saw a great deal of Peters at
Saigon, and he pressed him to accept a post
that was in his gift in the Chinese Customs
service. Peters refused. I suppose he was at
that time thinking of coming home. The great
man then spoke to me about it, and had all but
offered it to me. How I should have jumped
at it! But suddenly it all went off and he said
no more to me. I believed that Peters warned
him against me; possibly, being sore against
Peters, I was mistaken; but at any rate that was
what I ever afterwards believed. It was partly
in desperate annoyance about this that I plunged
into what then seemed my wild venture with
Longhurst.</p>

<p>“And now I must tell you about Longhurst.
He had been at some time, I suppose, a clever
man; at least he had a wonderful store of
practical knowledge about forests, mining and other
matters, and he had travelled a great deal in all
parts of that region of the world, and picked up
many things which he wanted to turn to account.
He had made a little money which he wished to
increase, and he had a great scheme of
organising and developing the trade of South-Eastern
Asia and its islands in various valuable kinds
of timber, spices, gum, shellac, etc., etc. He
promised any one who could join him that in a
few years, by exploiting certain yet undeveloped
but most profitable sources of supply, he could
get a monopoly of several important trades, the
sago trade, for example. He set forth his scheme
to the company generally at the English Club
the first time I met him, and everybody laughed
at him except me, who saw that if he got into
the right hands there was something to be made
out of his discoveries for him and other people.
And as a matter of fact we did make something
of them, more than I expected, but not what he
expected. I did not make a large sum out of
our joint venture, not much more than I could
have made by staying where I was, but I got
the knowledge of Eastern commerce, which has
enabled me since to do what I have done.</p>

<p>“I saw you smile just now, Mr. Callaghan,
when I spoke of Longhurst getting into the
right hands. Well he did; and I did not. He
had been, as I said, a clever man, and there was
something taking about him with his bluff,
frank, burly air, but he was going off when I
met him. People do go downhill if they spend
all their lives in odd corners of the earth; and,
though I did not know it at first, he had taken
the surest road downhill, for he had begun to
drink, and very soon it gained upon him like
wildfire. When he once goes wrong no one
can be so wrong-headed as a man like that, who
thinks that he knows the world from having
knocked about it a great deal doing nothing
settled; and I should have found Longhurst
difficult to deal with in any case. As it was,
Longhurst dined with Peters the night before
we left Saigon together. On the first day of
our voyage he was very surly to me, and he
said, ‘I heard something funny about you last
night, Master Cartwright. I wish I had heard
it before, that’s all.’ When I fired up and told
him to say straight out what it was, he looked
at me offensively, and went off into the
smoking-room of the steamer to have another drink.
That was not a cheerful beginning of our
companionship, and I had my suspicion as to whom
I ought to thank for it. I believe the same
tale-bearer that I mentioned before had been
telling Peters some yarn about my arrangements
with Longhurst, which looked as if I was trying
to swindle him, and that Peters had passed it
on. I very soon found that Longhurst was not so
simple as he seemed. I daresay he had meant
honestly enough by me at first, but having
got it into his thick head that I was a little
too sharp, he made up his mind to be the sharper
of the two; and the result was that if I was to
be safe in dealing with him I must take care to
keep the upper hand of him, and before long I
made up my mind that my partner should go
out of the firm. I could have made his fortune
if he would have let me, but I meant that the
concern should be mine and not his, and I did
not disguise it from him. That was my great
mistake. I do not know what story, if any, you
have picked up about my dealings with
Longhurst. He put about many stories when we
had begun to quarrel—for he had begun by
that time, if not before, to drink freely—but the
matter that we finally quarrelled about was this.
Of the various concessions which we started by
obtaining (at least I started by obtaining them;
that was to be my great contribution to the
partnership), two only proved of very great
importance—one was from the Spanish
Government of the Philippines and the other from the
Government of Anam, and these, as it happened,
were for three and four years, renewable under
certain conditions but also revocable earlier in
certain events. There was no trickery about
that, though Longhurst may have thought there
was. I simply could not get larger concessions
with the means of persuasion (bribery, in other
words) at our command. Subsequently I got
renewals and extensions of these concessions to
myself alone. To the best of my belief then
and now the transaction held water in law and in
equity, but whatever a lawyer might think of
it, the common-sense was this: Longhurst had
become so reckless and so muddle-headed that
nothing could any longer prosper under his
control, if he had the control, and besides that,
I never could have got the extended concessions
at all if he was to be one of the concessionaires.
There are some things which an Eastern
Government or a Spanish Government cannot stand,
and Longhurst’s treatment of the natives was
one of them. But I must go back a bit. There
were other things besides this which contributed
to our quarrel. For one thing, odd as it may
sound in speaking of two grown-up men,
Longhurst bullied me—physically bullied me. He
was a very powerful man, more so, I should
think, even than you, Mr. Callaghan, and when,
as often happened, we were travelling alone
together, he used to insist on my doing as he
liked in small arrangements, by the positive
threat of violence. To do him justice he did
not do it when he was sober, and though in
those days I was a weakly and timid man
compared to what I have become, I soon learned
how to stop it altogether. But you can easily
imagine that I did not love him; and a bitter
feeling towards his chief companion is not a
wholesome thing for a man to carry about
through a year or two of hard work in that
climate (for it is a climate! none of the dry
heat and bracing winters you have in Northern
India); still I hope I did not bear him malice
so much for that as for other things. I have
said I have no scruples, but I have no liking
for ruffianism and cruelty. I hate them for the
same reason for which I hate some pictures
and some architecture, because they are not to
my taste. But I had, in out-of-the-way places,
among weak savages, where law and order
had not come, to put up with seeing deeds
done which people here at home would not
believe were done by their countrymen, and
which a man who has served his days in an
honourable service like the Indian Civil could
believe in least of all. He had kicked a wretched
man to death (for I have no doubt he died of it)
the day he died himself.</p>

<p>“But why do I make all these excuses? for,
after all, what did I do that needs so much
excuse? I told Longhurst plainly what I had
done about the concessions and what I proposed
to do for him, and he seemed to fall in with it
all, and then he went home for a month’s holiday
in England. I suppose he saw some lawyer,
probably Thalberg, and got it into his head that
he could make out a case of fraud against me.
At any rate, when he returned, he seemed surly;
he did not have it out with me straight, but he
began to make extravagant demands of me and
threaten me vaguely with some exposure if I
did not give in to them, which of course I did
not. Then he quarrelled about it in his cups,
for the cups were getting more and more
frequent, and several times over he got so violent
as to put me in actual fear of my life. And at
last, unhappily for him, it came to a real
encounter. We had visited the island of Sulu,
where I had reason to think we might establish
a branch of our business, and after two or three
days in an inland town we were returning to the
coast, expecting to be picked up by a Chinese
junk which was to take us back. The evening
before we started down he produced a packet
of documents and brandished it at me as if it
contained something very damaging to me, and
I could see plainly (for I have an eye for
handwriting) that on the top of it was an envelope
addressed by Peters. I am not justified in
inferring from this that Peters—who had seen
Longhurst several times since he had seen
me—had again been repeating to him some
malicious falsehood with which he had been stuffed
before he left Saigon; but can you wonder that
I did infer it? On the march down—when we
were alone, for we had sent on our servants
before—Longhurst began again more savagely
than ever, and for about an hour he heaped all
sorts of charges and vile insinuations upon me,
which I answered for a while as patiently as I
could. At last, breaking off in the middle of a
curse, he fell into silence. He strode on angrily
ahead for a hundred yards or so. Then at a
rocky part of the path, where I was below him,
he turned suddenly. He hurled at me a great
stone which narrowly missed me, and then he
came rushing and clambering back down the
path at me. I fired (he turned as I fired).
That was the end. Was it murder?” He
paused and then braced himself up as he
answered his own question. “Yes, it was,
because I was angry, not afraid, and because I
could easily have run away, only for some
reason I did not mean to.</p>

<p>“But I am foolish to weary you with all this
long preliminary story, for, after all, what do
you care about Longhurst; it is Peters, your
own friend, about whom you care. You think
that he came to suspect me of murdering
Longhurst, and I killed him for that; but as sure as I
killed him, that was not—that was <em>not</em> what made
me do it.”</p>

<p>Vane-Cartwright sat for a long time with his
face covered with his hands. At last he sat
up and looked me straight in the face. “Mr.
Driver, did you never suspect there was a
romance in Peters’ life of which you knew
nothing? I did know of it, and I honoured
him for it, but I hated him for it too. Certainly
you did not suspect that there was a romance
in mine. It does not seem likely that a great
passion should come to a calculating man like
me, with the principles of conduct of which I
have made no secret to-day. But such things
do happen, and a great passion came late in
life to me. And here is the cruel thing, which
almost breaks my philosophy down, and makes
me think that after all there is a curse upon
crime. It ought to have enriched and ennobled
my life, ought it not? It came at just the
moment, in just the shape, and with all the
attendant accidents to ruin me.</p>

<p>“It began five years ago. Miss Denison and
her parents were staying at Pau. I was in the
same hotel and I met them. I knew nothing
then of their position and wealth and all that, for
I had not been long in London. I loved her,
and a great hope came into my life. One begins
to weary after a while of toiling just to make
money for oneself. For a few days all seemed
changed, the whole world was new and bright
to me. Suddenly I got an intimation from the
father of the lady that my calls were no longer
acceptable. I could not imagine the reason. I
asked for an interview to explain matters, and
he refused it. I left at once. I did not yet
know how hard I should find it to give her up.
It was only as I left the hotel that I learned
that Peters, Peters whom I had not met since
we quarrelled at Saigon, and of whom I last
heard of the day that Longhurst died, was in the
hotel and had called on my friends. Now I see
clearly that I am wrong to draw inferences, but
again, I ask, could I help inferring what I did?</p>

<p>“More than four years passed. I tried hard to
create new interests for myself in artistic things,
making all sorts of collections; and I developed
an ambition to be a personage in London society.
Then I saw Miss Denison again, and I knew
that I had not forgotten her, and could not do so.
I knew now what had happened, and so I
absolutely insisted on an explanation. I had it out
with the father. I satisfied him absolutely. In
a few weeks’ time I was engaged. For the first
time in my life I was happy. That was only
a month before I came to Long Wilton. I must
tell you that Peters had known the Denisons
long, and that I knew Miss Denison had been
fond of him, but we naturally did not talk of
him much, and I did not know he was at Long
Wilton. There, to my complete surprise, I saw
Peters again. I would not avoid him, but I
certainly did not wish to meet him. He,
however, came up to me and spoke quite cordially.
I do not know whether he had reflected and
thought he had been hard on me, but he seemed
to wish to make amends, and I at that time, just
for a few short hours, had not got it in my heart
to be other than friendly with any man.</p>

<p>“That evening I spent at his house. You,
Mr. Callaghan, were there, and you must have
seen that something happened. I at any rate
saw that something I said had revived all
Peters’ suspicions of me, and this time with
the addition of a suspicion, which was true, that
I had murdered Longhurst.</p>

<p>“Now, I ask you, if you have any lingering
idea that that was why I killed him, how was
it possible that he could ever prove me guilty?
Have you any inkling of how he could have done
it? I have not. Now what could induce me, on
account of a mere idle suspicion on the part
of a man who need be nothing to me, to run
the risk amounting almost to certainty of being
hanged for murdering him?</p>

<p>“But my conscience was active then, for a
reason which any man who has loved may guess.
I wanted to clear up all with Peters. I could
not get him alone that evening, and I had to
go next day. I returned the first day I could,
bringing certain materials for clearing up the
early transaction about which he had first
suspected me. I was honestly determined to make
a clean breast to him about Longhurst. You
can hardly wonder that I meant to feel my way
with him in this. I tried to get to close quarters
with him. Mr. Callaghan saw enough to know
how unsuccessful I was. I tried all the time,
again and again, to draw Peters into intimate
talk about our days in the East, but he always
seemed to push me away. I determined very
soon to obtain a letter from a friend, whom I
will not name now, who knew how Longhurst
had treated me, which I could show to Peters;
so I wrote to him. But in the meantime
relations with Peters grew harder and harder. I
will not spin out excuses, but all his old
animosity to me returned, and I began while I was
waiting for that letter to feel once again the old
rancour I had felt. This man had hurt me by
suspecting me falsely, when, had he shown me
confidence, he could have made a better man of
me; he had spoilt my best chance of a career;
he had poisoned my relations with Longhurst,
and so brought about the very crime of which
he was now lying in wait to accuse me; he had
thwarted my love for four miserable years. On
the top of all that came this letter” (he had held
a letter in his hand all the time he was speaking),
“and it shall speak for itself. But first one
question. You may remember when you first
saw me at Long Wilton. Well, I came really as
it happened upon an errand for Miss Denison.
Mrs. Nicholas, in the village, you may not know,
had been her nurse. But that does not matter.
Between my first visit and my return, do you
happen to remember that a Mrs. Bulteel was
staying at the hotel, and visited Mr. Peters of
whom she was an old friend?”</p>

<p>Callaghan remembered that it was so.</p>

<p>“Mrs. Bulteel is, I have always supposed,
the lady referred to in this letter, which reached
me (will you note?) by the five o’clock post at
Peters’ house, seven hours before I killed him.”</p>

<p>He passed the letter to me without looking
at me. Callaghan and I read it together. It was
in a lady’s hand, signed with the name of Lady
Denison, the young lady’s mother. It appeared
to be written in great agitation. Its purport was
that the young lady had resolved, so her mother
found, to break off her engagement with
Vane-Cartwright. She had formerly loved another
man, whose name the mother thought she must
not mention, though probably Vane-Cartwright
knew it, but had supposed that he did not care
for her or had given up doing so. She had now
learned from an officious lady friend, who had
lately seen this old lover, that he cared for her
still; that he had concealed his passion when
he found she favoured Vane-Cartwright, but
that having now apparently quarrelled with
Vane-Cartwright he had authorised her to let
this be known if she saw her opportunity. The
mother concluded by saying that she had so far
failed in reasoning with her daughter, who had
wished to write and break off her engagement,
and all she could do was to lay on her the
absolute command not to write to Vane-Cartwright
at all for the present.</p>

<p>“There is only one comment to make on that
letter,” said Vane-Cartwright. “You may
wonder why I should have assumed that it was
hopeless. Well, I knew the lady better than
you, better than her mother did, and knew that
if her old attachment had returned it had
returned to stay. Besides, I read this letter with
my rival sitting in the room (you two gentlemen
were sitting in the room too as it happens), and
when hard, self-contained people do come under
these influences, they do not give way to them
by halves.</p>

<p>“Thank you,” said Vane-Cartwright, when
we had read and returned the letter. “I am
glad you have heard me so patiently. That all
this makes me less of a villain than you thought
me, I do not pretend to say; but I think you
will understand why I wished some men whom
I respected, as I respect you, to know my story.
I do not suggest for a moment that it should
influence your present action. Here I am, as
I said to begin with, your prisoner. Of course
you see that society is just as safe from future
murders from me as from any man. But if
your principles of justice demand life for life, or
if human feeling makes you resolve to avenge
your friend, that is just what I came here
expecting. I am the last man in the world who
could give an unprejudiced opinion on the ethics
of punishment.”</p>

<p>He ended with a quiet and by no means
disagreeable smile.</p>

<p>As I have often said I make no sort of
pretence to report any talk quite correctly, and here,
where the manner of the talk is of special
importance, I feel more than ever my incompetence
to report it. I can only say that the singular
confession, of which I have striven to repeat the
purport, was in reality delivered with a great
deal of restrained eloquence, and with occasional
most moving play of facial expression, all the
more striking in a man whom I had seldom
before seen to move a muscle of his face
unnecessarily. It was delivered to two men of
whom one (myself) was physically overwrought,
while the other (Callaghan), naturally emotional,
was at the commencement in the fullest elation
of triumphant pursuit, in other words, ready to
recoil violently.</p>

<p>We sat, I do not know how long, each
waiting for the other to speak. Vane-Cartwright
sat meanwhile neither looking at us nor moving
his countenance—only the fingers of one hand
kept drumming gently upon his knee.</p>

<p>At last I did what I think I never did but
once before, obeyed an impulse almost physical,
to speak words which my mouth seemed to utter
mechanically. If they were the words of reason,
they were not the words of my conscious thought,
for that was busy with all, and more than all the
scruples which had ever made this business hard
to me.</p>

<p>“Mr. Vane-Cartwright,” I said, “it is my
painful duty to tell you at once that I do not
believe one word you have said, except what
I knew already.”</p>

<p>He went white for a moment; then quickly
recomposed himself and inclined his head slightly
with a politely disdainful expression.</p>

<p>“Oh, Driver,” said Callaghan, in a gentle
tone, and he arose and paced the room. He
was strangely moved. To begin with, though
he had felt nothing but remorseless glee in his
share in hunting his victim down, he would in
any case have felt great repugnance at giving
him the <i>coup de grâce</i>. But then he had once
taken the step of inviting that victim into his
own room; he had sat there for an hour and
a half with that victim by his own fireside,
telling his life-story and implicitly pleading for
his life. And the pleading had been conducted
under the flattering pretext that it was not
pleading at all but the instinctive confidence
of a redoubtable antagonist, in one whom he
respected for having beaten him. As for the
story itself, Callaghan did not exactly believe it;
on the contrary, I found afterwards that, while
I had not got beyond a vague sense that the
whole story was a tissue of lies, he had noted
with rapid acuteness each of the numerous
points of improbability in it; but to his mind
(Irish, if I may say publicly what I have said
to him) the fact that the story appealed to his
imaginative sympathy was almost as good as
its being true, and what in respect of credibility
was wanting to its effect was quite made good
by Callaghan’s admiration for the intrepidity
with which the man had carried out this
attempt on us. And the story did appeal to
his sympathy, he had sympathised with his
early struggles, he had sympathised still more
with the suggestion of passion in his final crime,
and (Irish again) had ignored the fact that on
the criminal’s own showing the crime conceived
in passion had been carried through with a
cold-blooded meanness of which Callaghan’s own
nature had no trace. Lastly, he was genuinely
puzzled by the problem as to the morality of
vengeance which Vane-Cartwright had raised
with so dexterously slight a touch.</p>

<p>Whatever his motive, Callaghan was upon
the point of resolving that, at least from his
own room, where the criminal had come to
appeal to his mercy, that criminal should go
away free. And if Callaghan had so resolved
I should have been powerless for a time; he was
prepared and I was not as to the steps
immediately to be taken to secure Vane-Cartwright’s
arrest. But it seems, if for once I may use that
phrase with so little or else so deep a meaning,
that the luck had departed from
Vane-Cartwright. At this crisis of his fate a device of
his own recoiled upon him with terrible force.</p>

<p>“I cannot do it! I cannot do it!” Callaghan
was exclaiming, when the door opened and a
telegram was brought for me. This was the
message: “Clarissa terribly ill, symptoms
poison, Bancroft, Fidele”. It meant that my
wife was dying at the friend’s villa to which she
had gone, and dying by that man’s means, and it
was certified by the use of the password which
my wife had told me to expect. I did not
reflect and I did not speak; I grasped
Callaghan’s arm and I put the telegram in his
hand. He knew enough to understand the
message well. He read it with an altered face.
He passed it to Vane-Cartwright and said:
“Read that, and take it for my answer”. I
should doubt if Vane-Cartwright had often
been violently angry, but he was now. He
dashed the telegram down with a curse. “The
fool,” he said, and he gasped with passion, “if
he was going to try that trick, why did not he
do it before?” Callaghan stepped up to me,
put his big arms round me, and for a moment
hugged me in them, with tears in his eyes.
Then without a word he strode across the room,
and, before I could see what was happening,
Vane-Cartwright’s hands were tied behind his
back with a great silk handkerchief.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch22">

<h2>Chapter XXII</h2>

<p>My story draws towards its close, and of mystery
or of sudden peril it has little more to tell. Upon
one point, the most vital to me, let me not give
the reader a moment’s suspense. My wife
did not die of poison, had not been poisoned,
had not been ill, had not sent that telegram.
What had happened was this: on one single
occasion she had not despatched her own
message herself; through the misunderstanding or
too prompt courtesy of her host’s butler, the
telegram which she had written had been taken
by a messenger, and it had fallen into the
hands of the enemy’s watchful emissary. It
had revealed to him the password which my
wife used to me; and in its place there had
gone over the wires a message which would
indeed have called me back at any stage of the
pursuit, but which was fated to arrive neither
sooner nor later than the moment when it must
destroy Vane-Cartwright’s last hope of escape.</p>

<p>I say not later, for indeed I have evidence
strong enough for my now suspicious mind that
Vane-Cartwright had endeavoured to prepare
his escape in the event of his failure to persuade
Callaghan and myself. An unoccupied flat
immediately below Callaghan’s had the day
before been engaged by a nameless man, who
paid a quarter’s rent in advance, and on the day
of his interview with us, several strange persons,
who were never seen there again, arrived with
every sign of belated haste; but, whatever
accident had delayed them, they arrived a quarter
of an hour after we had left.</p>

<p>And so on the 15th of May, 1897, nearly
sixteen months after Peters’ death, his murderer
was handed over to the police, with information
which, including as it did the fact of his
confession, ensured their taking him into custody.</p>

<p>Then I, in my turn, became Callaghan’s
prisoner. I arrived at Charing Cross station in
good time for the night train, and found my
luggage already there and registered, and my
ticket taken. Our tickets taken, rather, for,
protest as I might, I was escorted by Callaghan,
indeed nursed (and I needed it) the whole way
to Florence, and to the villa where my wife was
staying. One item remains untold to complete
for the present the account of the debt which I
owe him. We had hardly left Charing Cross
when his quick wits arrived at precisely that
explanation of the telegram which in happy fact
was true; but all the way, talkative man though
he was, he refrained from vexing my bruised
mind with a hope which, he knew, I should not
be able to trust.</p>

<p>When he had learnt at the door that his happy
foreboding was true, no entreaty would induce
him to stay and break bread. He returned at
once to England, leaving me to enter alone to that
reunion of which I need say nothing, nor even
tell how much two people had hungered for it.</p>

<p>The reader who is curious in such matters
might almost reconstruct for himself (in spite of
the newspaper reports which naturally are
misleading) the trial of William Vane-Cartwright.
He might pick out from these pages the facts
capable of legal proof, which, once proved and
once marshalled into their places, could leave
no reasonable doubt of the prisoner’s guilt.</p>

<p>But, however late, the trained intelligence of
the police had now been applied to the matter,
and the case wore an altered aspect. No
startling discovery had come to pass, only the
revelation of the obvious. Some points had been
ascertained which ought to have been
ascertained long before; still more, facts long known
had been digested, as, surely, it should have
been somebody’s business to digest them from
the first. In particular, tardy attention had
been paid to the report of the young constable
who, as I mentioned, followed Sergeant Speke
into Peters’ room, and who had incurred some
blame because his apparent slowness had allowed
some trespassers to come and make footprints
on the lawn (I fancy his notes had been
overlooked when some officer in charge of the case
had been superseded by another). The
observed movements, just after the crime, of two
or three people who were about the scene, had
been set down in order. Enquiries, such as
only authority could make, had ultimately been
made among Vane-Cartwright’s acquaintance in
the East, and though disappointing in the main,
they yielded one fact of importance. Moreover,
the researches which were made by Callaghan
shortly after the murder, and which I had
supposed at the time were so futile, now appeared in
another light. Just before that suspicious flight
to Paris, he had given to the police at Exeter
some scrappy and ill-explained notes; and on
a subsequent visit, which I have mentioned, to
Scotland Yard, he had handed in a long and
over-elaborate memorandum. These now
received justice. I must, therefore, attempt to
state, with dry accuracy, the case which was
actually presented against the accused.</p>

<p>Upon the fact that he had confessed his guilt,
though indeed it reversed the surface improbability
that a man in his position was a criminal,
I must lay no separate emphasis. Neither judge
nor prosecuting counsel did so. The defence
dealt with it upon a theory which turned it to
positive advantage. I myself can well conceive
that a man, to whom his life was little and his
reputation much, might have taken the risk of a
false confession to us in the hope of binding us
to silence.</p>

<p>But, to begin, Peters was without doubt
murdered on a certain night, and during that
night Vane-Cartwright was one of a few who
could easily have had access to him.</p>

<p>Now years before one Longhurst had
disappeared; a report had got abroad that he went
down in a certain ship which had been lost;
the report was false; but he never reappeared;
several witnesses (traced out by the enquiry of
the police in the East) appeared at the trial, and
swore that Vane-Cartwright had often spoken
of Longhurst’s sailing in that ship; yet he must,
according to Mr. Bryanston’s evidence, have
known that this was false; and, according to
the same evidence, he had been in Longhurst’s
company after the time when the rest of
Longhurst’s neighbours last saw him. From this
(though the other proved facts of their
connexion amounted to little more than they were
reputed partners) it followed that
Vane-Cartwright was in a position in which suspicion of foul
play towards Longhurst might easily fall on him.</p>

<p>Next, Peters at the time of his death not
merely entertained this suspicion but was taking
steps to obtain proof of its truth; for there
were his letters to Bryanston and to Verschoyle
still extant, and admissible in evidence as <i>res
gestæ</i>, the actual first steps which he had taken
with this aim.</p>

<p>Next, Vane-Cartwright knew of Peters’
suspicion and was greatly perturbed by the
knowledge. His whole conduct was in this regard
most significant. Callaghan showed that on the
first evening when he had seen the two men
together their intercourse had at first been easy,
but that by the end of the evening something
had happened which completely altered their
manners; the one became abstracted and aloof,
the other eagerly watched him. Of the talk
which caused this change Callaghan had only
caught Peters’ question, “sailed in what,” but it
was evident now to what that question referred.
It was in itself strange that after this
Vane-Cartwright should have availed himself of a
general invitation given by Peters earlier, and
have come rather suddenly to his house, putting
off (as it was now shown) for that purpose a
previous important engagement. It was a
sinister fact that, before he did so, he had set
on foot mysterious enquiries, some of which
related to the two men to whom, in his presence,
Peters had written letters about the affair of
Longhurst, while the rest, though less obviously,
appeared to be connected with the same matter.
The first fruits of these enquiries (and they were
telling) had been, by his arrangement, brought
to him on the very afternoon before the murder.
After the murder he had, it now seemed plain,
stayed on at my house merely in the hope
of intercepting Bryanston’s answer. By what
means he knew that the sting of Dr. Verschoyle
lay in his journals cannot be conjectured, but
there was no mistaking the purpose with which,
a little later, he obtained these journals by deceit.
Altogether his conduct had been that of a man in
whom Peters had aroused an anxiety so intense
as to form a possible motive for murdering him.</p>

<p>And altogether his conduct after the murder
bore, now that it could be fully traced, the
flagrant aspect of guilt. He had unlatched the
window; this was now certain, though of course
of that act by itself an innocent account might
be given. The reader knows too the whole
course of his action in regard to Trethewy and
his family, beginning with the lie, which made
him appear as screening Trethewy when in fact
he was plotting his undoing, and ending with his
breaking in upon my talk with Ellen Trethewy,
who had stood where she might have seen him
making those tracks in the snow. The making
of the tracks,—this, of course, was the key to his
whole conduct, the one thing, which, if quite
certain, admitted of but one explanation. Only
just here, when last we dealt with that matter, a
faint haze still hung. Thalberg swore to having
seen him in the field, where those tracks and no
others were just afterwards found; Ellen
Trethewy had seen him start to go there and again
seen him returning. Yet, though the two
corroborated each other, there might be some doubt
of the inference to be drawn from what Ellen
Trethewy saw (that depended on knowledge of
the ground), and of the correctness of the
observation made by Thalberg from afar. After
all, was it absolutely impossible that Trethewy
had through some strange impulse, rational or
irrational, made those tracks himself,—perhaps,
with his sense of guilt and in the
over-refinement of half-drunken cunning, he had fabricated
against himself a case which he thought he
could break down.</p>

<p>But here the late revealed evidence came in.
It was certain, first, that those tracks did not
exist in the morning. The constable who had
let the trespassers come in stopped them when
he found them, and noted carefully how far they
had gone; he got one of them, an enterprising
young journalist, to verify his observation, and
it resulted in this, that the part of the lawn where
those guilty tracks began was absolutely
untrodden then. Next it was certain now that
throughout the time when those tracks were
made Trethewy had been in his house. Now,
when the whole course of events that morning
was considered, there could be no doubt that
those tracks were made by some one who knew
exactly what the situation was. Since it was
not Trethewy, it lay between Sergeant Speke,
myself, Callaghan and Vane-Cartwright.
Sergeant Speke and I could easily give account of
our time that day, but I think I mentioned that
there had arisen some doubt as to where
Callaghan had been just at the critical hour. It
was explained now; Callaghan had been too far
away; just at that time he had gone again to
the hotel, moved by one of his restless impulses
to try and spy upon Thalberg. It lay then
beyond doubt that the tracks were made by
Vane-Cartwright, and it was beyond doubt why
he made them.</p>

<p>But the case did not rest there. The front
door of Grenvile Combe had been bolted on the
inside that night, before Peters died.
Presumably Peters did it; anyway Vane-Cartwright and
Callaghan, as they had said next morning, found
it bolted when they came down disturbed by the
noise, and themselves bolted it again; and Peters
was then living, for they heard him in his room.
The other doors had been bolted in like manner
by the servants. Every window but two had
also been latched. The doors had remained
bolted till the servants were about in the
morning, when Peters must have been some hours
dead. The fastened windows were still fastened
when we came to the house (a window in the
back servants’ quarters had been open for a
short while in the morning, but the servants
had been about all the time), for the constable,
before he obeyed the Sergeant and began his
search outside, had been in every room and
noticed every fastening. The two exceptions
were Vane-Cartwright’s own open window,
which did not matter, and the little window at
the back, already named as a possible means of
entrance. Careful experiment had now been
made (Callaghan had long ago suggested it),
and it showed that, whoever could climb to that
window, only an infant could pass through it.
No one then had entered the house by night, or,
if he had previously entered it, had escaped
by night; and it was also certain that no one
could have lurked there concealed in the
morning. Therefore, Peters was murdered by an
inmate of the house, by the housemaid, or by the
cook, or by Vane-Cartwright, or by Callaghan.
Now the housemaid and the cook had passed a
wakeful night; the disturbance in the road had
aroused them and left them agitated and alarmed;
each was therefore able to swear that the other
had remained all night in the bedroom which
they shared. Therefore, Peters was murdered
either by Vane-Cartwright or by Callaghan.</p>

<p>And why not, it might be asked, by Callaghan,
against whom at one time such good grounds
of suspicion were to be found? The reader
must by this time have seen that the eccentric
and desultory proceedings of Callaghan, even
his strange whim of staying in that
crime-stricken house and the silly talk with which he
had put me off about his aim, had, as he once
boasted to me, a method, which though odd and
over-ingenious, was rational and very acute.
The neglected memorandum he had made for
the police was enough in itself (without his
frankness under cross-examination) to set his
proceedings since the murder in a clear light.
Callaghan, moreover, was the life-long friend of
Peters. True it was that (as the defence scented
out) he had owed Peters £2,000, and Peters’ will
forgave the debt. True, but it was now proved
no less true, that since that will was made the
debt had been paid, and paid in a significant
manner. Callaghan had first remitted to Peters
£500 from India. Peters, thereupon, had sent
Callaghan an acquittance of the whole debt.
Callaghan’s response was an immediate payment
of £250 more. And the balance, £1,250, had
been paid a very few days before Peters was
killed. This was what an ill-inspired
cross-examination revealed, and if the guilt lay
between Vane-Cartwright and Callaghan, there
could be no doubt which was the criminal.</p>

<p>So Callaghan and I had gone through tangled
enquiries and at least some perilous adventures
to solve a puzzle of which the solution lay all
the while at our feet, and at the feet of others.</p>

<p>It would be melancholy now to dwell on the
daring and brilliance of the defence. No
witness was called for it. It opened with a truly
impressive treatment of Vane-Cartwright’s
confession; and the broken state of his
temperament, originally sensitive and now harassed by
suspicion and persecution, was described with
a tenderness of which the speaker might have
seemed incapable, and which called forth for the
hard man in the dock a transient glow of
human sympathy. Every other part of his
conduct, so far as it was admitted, was made
the subject of an explanation, by itself plausible.
But little was admitted. Every separate item
of the evidence was made the subject of a doubt,
by itself reasonable. If a witness had been
called to tell some very plain matter of fact, that
kind of plain fact under one’s eyes was
notoriously the sort of thing about which the most
careless mistakes were made. If a witness had
had a longer tale to tell he had revealed some
poisonous pre-possession. I, for example, a
most deleterious type of cleric, had, besides a
prejudice against unorthodox Vane-Cartwright,
an animus to defend Trethewy, arising from
that sickly sentiment towards Miss Trethewy
which I betrayed when I fled to her from my
ailing family at Florence. In Trethewy’s case
again there had been a confession of a very
different order; and the suggestion was
dexterously worked that something still lay concealed
behind Trethewy’s story. Withal the vastness
of the region of possibility was exhibited with
vigorous appeals to the imagination. Strong
in every part, the defence as a whole was bound
to be weak; the fatality which made so many
lies and blunders work together for evil was
beyond belief; the conduct which needed so
much psychology to defend it was indefensible.</p>

<p>So the verdict was given and the sentence
was passed.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch23">

<h2>Chapter XXIII</h2>

<p>Once again I saw William Vane-Cartwright.
At his own request I was summoned to visit
him in the gaol. It was not the interview of
penitent and confessor; none the less I am
bound to silence about it, even though my
silence may involve the suppression of
something which tells in his favour. One thing I
may and must say. Part of his object in
sending for me was to make me his agent in several
acts of kindness.</p>

<p>As I look back, I often ask myself: Was
there indeed no truth, beyond what we knew,
in the tale that this man told to Callaghan and
me, and which was skilfully woven to accord
as far as possible with many things which we
might have and had in fact discovered. In
point of vital facts it was certainly false. I
could now disprove every syllable of that love
story; his acquaintance with Miss Denison was
only a few months old; she had never known
Peters; and the letter that he showed us was a
forgery of course. I happen, moreover, too late
for any useful purpose, to have met several
people who knew Longhurst well; all agree that
he was rough and uncompanionable, all that he
was strictly honest and touchingly kind; all testify
that in his later days he was a total abstainer.</p>

<p>Yet, in the face of this, I believe that
Vane-Cartwright described fairly, as well as with
insight, the influences which in boyhood and early
manhood told so disastrously upon him. I now
know, as it happens, a good deal about his
parents, for one of my present neighbours was a
family friend of theirs. They were a gifted but
eccentric couple, with more “principles” than
any two heads can safely hold. Little as I like
their beliefs, I cannot but suspect that their
home life was governed by a conscientiousness
and a tender affection for their child, from
which, if he had wished to be guided right,
some light must have fallen on his path. Yet
without doubt their training was as bad a
preparation as could be for what he was to
undergo. He lost his fortune early, and was exiled
to a settlement in the East which, by all
accounts, was not a school of Christian chivalry.
Almost everything in his surroundings there
jarred upon his sensibility which on the æsthetic
side was more than commonly keen. Dozens
of English lads pass through just such trials
unshaken, some even unspotted, but they have
been far otherwise nurtured than he. Peters
too had an influence upon his youth. I, who
knew Peters so well, know that he cannot have
done the spiteful things which Vane-Cartwright
said, but I do not doubt for one moment that
he did repel his young associate when he need
not have done so. Peters was young too, and
may well be forgiven, but I can imagine that
by that chill touch he sped his comrade on the
downward course which chanced to involve his
own murder.</p>

<p>Altogether it is easy enough to form some
image, not merely monstrous, of the way in
which that character formed itself out of its
surroundings; to understand how the poor lad
became more and more centred in himself; to
praise him just in so far as that concentration
was strength; to note where that strength lay,
in the one virtue which in fact he had claimed as
his own, in the unflinching avowal to himself of
the motive by which he meant to live.</p>

<p>That motive, a calculated resolve to be
wealthy, to become detached in outward fact
as he was already in feeling from the sort of
people and the sort of surroundings amid which
his present lot was cast, had already been
formed when the partnership with Longhurst
offered him his opportunity. One may well
believe him that the three years of that
partnership cost him much. His one companion was
a man whom, I take it, he was incapable of
liking, and his position at first was one of
subjection to him. He had lied to us much about
Longhurst, but I fancy that he had spoken
of him with genuine, however unjust, dislike.
What particular fraud he played upon him, or
whether it was, strictly speaking, a fraud at all,
I do not know. But no doubt he was by nature
mean (though ready enough to spend money),
and he was probably more mean when his
strength was not full fledged and his nascent
sense of power found its readiest enjoyment in
tricks. Assuredly he intended from the first
to use the partnership as much as possible for
himself and as little as possible for his partner.
I am told that this is in itself a perilous attitude
from a legal point of view, and that it is, in
many relations of life, harder than laymen think
to keep quite out of reach of the law by any
less painful course than that of positive honesty.
Let us suppose that he did only the sort of
thing which his own confession implied,
obtaining for himself alone the renewal of concessions
originally made to his firm. Even so, I
understand, he may have found himself in this
position, that Longhurst would have been entitled
to his share (the half or perhaps much more,
according to the terms of partnership) of
extremely valuable assets upon which
Vane-Cartwright had counted as his own. Moreover,
that possibly stupid man would have had his
voice about the vital question of how and when
to sell this property.</p>

<p>Even if this was all, it still meant that the
hope upon which Vane-Cartwright had set
his soul, the hope not of a competence but of
eminent wealth, was about to slip away, and to
slip away perhaps irretrievably. For, as I
have lately learnt, he was then ill, could not
remain in that climate, would not, if he fell down
the ladder, be able to start again, with more
money and more experience, where he had
started three years before. In the choice
which then arose he was not the man to set
his personal safety in the scales against his
ambition. And so the incredible deed was
done, and fortune favoured the murderer with
the report that his victim had been lost in a
wrecked ship (possibly even he had met with
that report before he killed him).
Henceforward, watchful as he had to be for a while, the
chief burden which his guilt laid upon him was
that of bearing himself with indifference.</p>

<p>Thirteen years had passed, years of
unvarying success. The watchfulness was now seldom
needed, and the indifference had become a pose.
And so at last, on his first evening at Grenvile
Combe, he fell talking in his wonted way of
Longhurst, and gave that false account of his
end to one of the only two living men with
whom it behoved him to take care. Instantly
the spectre of his crime, which he thought had
been laid, confronted him, and confronted him,
as some recollection warned him, with the real
peril of public shame, perhaps conviction and
death. Instantly too there arose, as if to his
aid, not as yet the full strength of his intellect
and courage, but the ingrained, dormant spirit of
crime. If he had only said to Peters, “He sailed
in the <i>Eleanor</i> with me. I killed him. I will
tell you all about it,” I have not a shadow of a
doubt that his confession would have been kept
inviolate. Only there were trials from which
even his nerve recoiled, and plain facts of human
nature which his acuteness never saw. So the
same deed was done again in quiet reliance upon
that wonderful luck which this time also had
provided him with a screen against suspicion,
and this time also seemed to require nothing of
him after the act was accomplished except to
bear himself carelessly. Indeed, though he
began to bear himself carelessly too soon—for
he trusted characteristically that Peters had this
night followed the practice of opening the
window, which he was oddly fond of preaching,
and he left the room without troubling to look
behind the curtain—his confidence seemed
justified. There was nothing in the room or in the
house, nothing under the wide vault of that
starlit sky that was destined to tell the tale.</p>

<p>Morning brought to his eyes, though not yet
to his comprehension, the presence of a huge
calamity, for the ground was white with snow in
which, if Trethewy had come through it, his
tracks would still be seen. Soon he heard that
Trethewy had in fact come home when the
snow lay there. Then at last his whole mind
rose to the full height of the occasion, to a height
of composure and energy from which in all his
later doings he never declined far. I have an
unbounded hatred for that prevalent worship of
strong men which seems to me to be born of
craven fear. Yet it extorts my most unwilling
admiration of this man that, when safety
depended so much upon inaction, the only action
he took was such as at once was appallingly
dangerous and yet was the only way to avoid an
even greater peril.</p>

<p>But strangely enough as I shut my mind
against that haunting memory which I have
written these pages to expel, far different traits
and incidents from this keep longest their hold
upon my imagination. I remember Peters not
as he died but as he lived; and the murderer
stands before me, as I take my leave, not in
virtue of signal acts of crime (which I could more
easily have forgiven) but of little acts, words,
even tones of hardness and of concentrated
selfishness, faintly noted in my story, rendered
darker to me by the knowledge that he could
be courteous and kind when it suited him. He
stands there as the type to me, not of that rare
being the splendid criminal, but of the man
who in the old phrase is “without bowels”.
And men (on whose souls also may God have
mercy) are not rare among us, who, without his
intellect or his daring, are as hard as he, but for
whom, through circumstances—not uncommon
and I do not call them fortunate—the path of
consistent selfishness does not diverge from the
path of a respectable life.</p>

<p>Strangely too, one of those lesser acts of
unkindness was needed to bring about his downfall.
If I had never seen him at Florence, the spark
of my baffled ire would not have been rekindled,
nor could I have met Trethewy’s family till they
had gone beyond the seas. And I should never
have seen him at Florence but that my wife,
who did not know his name, recalled upon seeing
him that little delinquency at Crema of which
she and I can think no longer with any personal
spleen. It seems as if he might have murdered
his partner and murdered his host with cruel
deliberation and gone unpunished; but since one
day without a second thought he refused a
common courtesy to a suffering woman and a
harassed girl, he had set in motion the cunning
machinery of fate, and it came to pass in the
end that the red hand of the law seized him and
dealt to him the doom which the reader has long
foreseen.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Let some surviving characters of this story
briefly bid farewell. For my wife and me, we
are settled in our country rectory, so near in
distance to London and in effect so far off; and,
if the now delightful labours of my calling seem
to me not more unsuccessful than perhaps they
should always seem to the labourer, I like to
think it means that what Eustace Peters,
half-unknowing, did for me abides.</p>

<p>Callaghan was our guest not two months ago,
a welcome guest to us, and even more to our
children. He talked alternately of a project of
land reclamation on the Wash and of an
immediate departure for the East in search of a clue to
the questions left unsolved in these pages. He
has since departed from this country, not, I
believe, for the East, but neither we nor any of his
friends know where he is, or doubt that wherever
he is, he can take care of himself and will hurt
no other creature. Mr. Thalberg continues his
law business in the City, though the business
has changed in character. I bear him no ill-will,
and yet am sorry to be told that (while the
disclosures in the trial lost him several old clients,
as well as his clerk, Mr. Manson) on the whole
his business has grown. Trethewy is now our
gardener. His daughter is a board-school
mistress in London. I hope he will long remain
with us, for I now like him as a man but could
not lay it upon my conscience to recommend
him as a gardener. Peters’ nephews, unseen by
the reader, have hovered close in the background
of my tale. Both have distinguished themselves
in India. Yesterday I married the elder to
Miss Denison, on whom, I hope, the reader
has bestowed a thought. In the other, who
is engaged to my eldest daughter, his uncle’s
peculiar gifts repeat themselves more markedly
and with greater promise of practical
achievement.</p>